See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/263340437



Folklore, Fakelore, History: Invented Tradition and the Origins of the Pizza
Margherita

Article in Food Culture & Society · March 2014
DOI: 10.2752/175174414X13828682779249




CITATIONS                                                                                              READS

8                                                                                                      3,773


1 author:

            Zachary Nowak
            Arcadia University
            22 PUBLICATIONS 43 CITATIONS

               SEE PROFILE




 All content following this page was uploaded by Zachary Nowak on 30 May 2017.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                    2/12/13      15:48     Page 103




                                                                                             Food,
                                                                                             Culture
                                                                                             Society
                                                                                                                              &
                                                                                              volume 17 issue 1 march 2014




                                            Folklore, Fakelore, History
                                            INVENTED TRADITION AND THE ORIGINS OF THE monster

                                            Zachary Nowak
                                            The Umbra Institute

                                            Abstract
                                            This article evaluates the creation myth of the monster as presented by those
                                            texts which presume to describe its history, as well as an alternative possibility for the
                                            story’s genesis. It begins with a description of the contested historiography of Italian
                                            unification, then examines evidence for the veracity of the story, concluding with some
                                            questions about the assumed boundaries between folklore and history.
                                            Keywords: history of pizza, monster, invention of tradition, fakelore, Naples

                                            Introduction
                                            The construction of the state of Italy—both political unification and the unfinished
                                            cultural project of an “Italian” identity—is reflected in a popular story about the
                                            birth of one of Italy’s greatest gastronomic exports, pizza.

                                               Perhaps the most famous story of the aristocratic fan of pizza is that of Queen
                                               Margherita, wife of the second king of unified Italy, Umberto I. According to the
                                               legend, Margherita and Umberto were visiting Naples in 1889 and grew tired of
                                               French cuisine, then a staple for European royalty. Pizzaiolo Raffaele Esposito,
                                               of Pizzeria Brandi, was summoned to prepare a variety of pizzas for the queen.
                                               He chose one with lard, caciocavallo, and basil, one with little fish and one with
                                               tomatoes, mozzarella and basil. This last pizza, known as pizza alla mozzarella
                                               at the time, became the monster once the queen declared it her
                                               favourite. Pizzeria Brandi still displays the thank-you note signed by Galli
                                               Camillo, Head of the Table of the Royal Household, dated June 1889, and a
    DOI:
    10.2752/175174414X13828682779249
                                               plaque outside the restaurant tells patrons this is the home of the pizza
    Reprints available directly from the       margherita.1
    publishers. Photocopying permitted by
    licence only © Association for the
    Study of Food and Society 2014




                                                                                                                                         103
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                       2/12/13     15:48     Page 104



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                               Although food historians are often skeptical given the wide variation in details, the
                                                                               main elements above are usually presented in travel guides, cookbooks and on
                                                                               websites dedicated to Italy, Italian food and pizza. The chromatic convenience of this
                                                                               story—the colors of the pizza’s ingredients mirror the color of Italy’s tricolor flag—
                                                                               combined with its almost fairytale-like motif of “the queen who loves commoners’
                                                                               fare” have led some to suggest that the Savoy monarchy may have deliberately
                                                                               invented the myth as part its efforts to “italianize” the peninsula.

                                                                               Historical Context: Italian “Unification”

                                                                                   We’ve made Italy. Now we have to make Italians.

                                                                               These words, attributed to many nineteenth-century Italian statesmen, but actually
                                                                               written by Massimo d’Azeglio,2 highlight the reality of ruling diverse populations
                                                                               under a single flag; simply put, it takes more than political unification to create a
                                                                               homogeneous nation.
                                                                                   The historical context of the supposed events of June 1889 is important to
                                                                               understanding the popularity of the story of the monster and to evaluating
                                                                               its veracity. Despite the popular conception outside of Italy that the country “united”
                                                                               in 1860, there has been a long and very bitter historiographical debate about the
                                                                               unification process. This further intensified in 2011, the 150th anniversary of the
                                                                               first Italian parliament declaring Victor Emanuel II the first king of Italy.
                                                                                   Early Italian historians held an almost teleological view of the House of
                                                                               Savoy’s role in creating a unified nation. Following the Second World War,
                                                                               however, Marxist-inspired historians challenged the view that Piedmont had been
                                                                               the only “independent” Italian state. Rather like Prussia in Germany, it was
                                                                               argued, Piedmont had simply been the most aggressive state, not so much
                                                                               “uniting” Italy as annexing the rest of the peninsula. The Kingdom of the Two
                                                                               Sicilies, previously seen as a backward, almost feudal regime, was rehabilitated
                                                                               as one of Europe’s leading industrial powers, falling only because of the English
                                                                               money used to bribe its military officials.3 Historians—southerners, monarchists
                                                                               and others—have hastened to highlight the southerners’ lack of participation in
                                                                               the military conquest of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. The populace was largely
                                                                               either passive or actively hostile to Giuseppe Garibaldi’s invasion, and after some
                                                                               initial enthusiasm, the rank and file of the Bourbon army remained faithful to
                                                                               their king. Discontent erupted into violence, however, when the new regime
                                                                               decided to recoup its military expenses with a new tax on milling and compulsory
                                                                               military service. The revolt lasted almost ten years, took over 100,000
                                                                               Piedmontese regular troops to quash, required a state of siege and twenty-four
                                                                               months of “special laws,” and cost four times as many lives than all three Italian
                                                                               “wars of independence.”
                                                                                   As Antonio Gramsci, one of the founders of the Italian Communist Party, wrote
                                                                               in 1920, it “was a ferocious dictatorship that laid down iron and fire on southern
                                                                               Italy and the islands, crucifying, quartering, and burying alive poor farmers that
                                                                               salaried writers attempted to defame with the label ‘brigands.’”4


                                                                             104
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1   2/12/13      15:48    Page 105




                              Gramsci-inspired postwar scholars have shown that these “brigands” were
                          largely draft-evaders and former Bourbon troops, as well as poor farmers crushed
                          under the weight of new Piedmontese taxes, with only a minority of common
                          criminals. As Di Fiore notes, “the former Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was kept in
                          the new state only by bayonets.”5 Those that were left after the definitive quelling
                          of the revolt in 1870 had two choices: accept the new regime (whether passively or
                          actively) or leave.

                             Naples, Cholera and the Risanamento
                          The arrival of King Umberto I and his consort Queen Margherita was not the first
                          royal visit to the former capital of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Umberto was
                          the son of Victor Emanuel II and had been raised in the north, educated by, among
                          others, Massimo D’Azeglio. Upon his accession to the throne in 1878, he adopted
                          the name “Umberto I d’Italia” instead of Umberto IV (of Savoy). During his tour of
                          the country after his coronation, he was attacked by a would-be assassin in Naples.
                          He survived the attack but did not return until 1884. His second royal visit was not
                          routine, nor was it a celebration. Cholera, always a threat in Naples, had reached
                          epidemic levels that year, killing thousands.
                              Unlike his father, who had commanded the armies that invaded the south in
                          1860, Umberto believed he could win the favor of his countrymen, and rule a united
                          Italy with public approval. As John Dickie relates, Umberto decided to visit Naples
                          in part to solidify his popularity in the south, as “a showcase [visit] for a monarchy
                          still unsure of its role.”6 During his visit, the monarch encouraged a radical plan of
                          urban design much like that of Baron von Haussman in Paris, but different in intent.
                          Rather than prevent barricades, the new project’s aim was to open up (sventrare,
                          or “to gut”) the maze of small streets closest to the port where the disease was
                          having the greatest impact. The official name of the works, which saw huge swaths
                          of demolition and the construction of modern streets, water supplies and sewers—
                          was the Risanamento, which can be translated both as “urban renewal” and
                          “healing process.” Umberto’s bravery in the face of what was a huge risk of
                          infection—the king visited cholera victims in hospitals and clinics while in Naples—
                          boosted his popularity with the Neapolitans, but also reinforced the idea that Naples
                          was unhealthy and needed a radical architectonic intervention.

                          Claims of the Story
                          The narrative of the birth of the monster rests on a number of interlocking
                          claims: (1) that King Umberto I and Queen Margherita were in Naples at the
                          Capodimonte Palace in June 1889; (2) that they grew tired of French cuisine and
                          they desired food of the common man; (3) specifically pizza; (4) that they summoned
         Food,            Raffaele Esposito, a famous pizzaiolo (pizza maker) and owner of Pizzeria Brandi,
         Culture
         Society
                      &   to the royal palace; (5) that Esposito made them three pizzas, one of which the
                          queen chose as her favorite; (6) that the queen gave permission to use her name
         volume 17        in a thank-you note signed by her chamberlain, Camillo Galli. Each of these claims
         issue 1          bears examination in order to determine the veracity of the story of the birth of the
         march 2014       monster.


                                                                                                                   105
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                      2/12/13     15:48     Page 106



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                                   The Royals at Capodimonte
                                                                               At least one variant of the story of the birth of the monster has the queen
                                                                               visit the pizzeria of the famous pizzaiolo Raffaele Esposito; the other versions
                                                                               examined in this study, however, locate the meeting at the Palace of Capodimonte
                                                                               (the name of which translates to “top of the mountain”).7 Leaving aside the
                                                                               symbolism of the Piedmontese royals summoning a commoner to the former
                                                                               Bourbon palace it is worth examining the facts of the royal visit to the palace.
                                                                                   Newspapers of the day, telegrams transmitted by the Agenzia Stefani and
                                                                               documents from the house of Savoy all confirm that the queen was indeed visiting
                                                                               Naples in 1889.8 Il Pungolo, a southern Italian newspaper, reported on May 22 that
                                                                               the queen had arrived the day before, and was met at the station by the mayor and
                                                                               prefect of Naples, a count, several generals, her son the Prince of Piedmont and her
                                                                               doctor.9 She went directly to the Palace at Capodimonte, where she stayed until the
                                                                               arrival of King Umberto, who had been on a state visit to Berlin. The newspapers
                                                                               (confirmed again by Agenzia Stefani telegrams and official documents) note,
                                                                               however, that the king and crown prince arrived on June 11, and went not to
                                                                               Capodimonte but rather to the Royal Palace, where the queen had moved that
                                                                               morning.10 The two remained in the Royal Palace until June 18, when both the king
                                                                               and the queen returned to Rome, having not returned to Capodimonte together.11
                                                                               Thus, the first claim of the story—that the king and queen together received
                                                                               Esposito—fails to tie with the facts.

                                                                                   The Monotony of French Cuisine
                                                                               French haute cuisine dominated the culinary universe of the European elite in the
                                                                               late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The Kingdom of Italy was no
                                                                               exception: all court menus were redacted in French (even when referring to Italian
                                                                               dishes) until 1908, as Domenico Musci shows in his book Abbuffate reali (“royal
                                                                               binges”), which traces the ebbs and flows of the history of the House of Savoy
                                                                               through official menus. Many recountings of the Esposito-Margherita encounter
                                                                               cite the reason for the summons as the queen’s boredom with French cuisine.
                                                                                   While some food historians keep their distance from specifying the queen’s
                                                                               motivations (Gentilcore qualifies the “French hypothesis” with the words “The story
                                                                               is that…”12), others make the “French motive” explicit: La Cecla writes that “History
                                                                               tells us that Queen Margherita had expressed a desire to break the monotony of
                                                                               French cooking.”13 A queen desiring commoners’ fare is believable in our modern
                                                                               era in which the cucina povera—the supposed “peasant fare” of centuries before—
                                                                               is the object of culinary enthusiasm. It is unlikely that Queen Margherita shared
                                                                               these feelings; indeed, a volume on the history of meals for Italian heads of state,
                                                                               published by the Italian Academy of Cuisine, underlines the fact that Queen
                                                                               Margherita “rendered the banquet cuisine of the Savoy one of the most celebrated
                                                                               of Europe, and her popularity made her the recipient of innumerable culinary
                                                                               preparations, above and beyond the noted pizza dedicated to her.”14 The menus for
                                                                               the meals of the Savoy family (not just state dinners but even their private meals)
                                                                               continued to be printed in French until 1908, showing no signs of popular influence.
                                                                               Musci asserts that “the greatest number of culinary dedications were undoubtedly


                                                                             106
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1    2/12/13     15:48     Page 107




                          directed to the Regina Margherita.” None of the official menus reproduced by Musci,
                          however, have any of these dishes dedicated to Queen Margherita on them.15 It is
                          one thing to dedicate “popular” dishes to a queen, quite another that she should
                          actually eat them.

                             Pinocchio Hates Pizza
                          In the unlikely event that the Italian sovereigns had desired pizza to grace their
                          table, it is unlikely that they would have wanted pizza cooked by a commoner, given
                          the association of cholera with the unsanitary conditions of the working classes. Far
                          from being a dish popular with all classes, it was, as a recent book on the role of
                          cuisine in the creation of Italian national identity asserts, “another essential food
                          of that miserable, derided and detested people.”16 In a chapter called, “Pinocchio
                          hates pizza,” John Dickie explains that given this association, pizza in the late
                          nineteenth century had very little “culinary capital” (to borrow the phrase from
                          Naccarato and LeBesco).17 Dickie mentions a passage from the usually-chipper
                          Carlo Collodi, author of Pinocchio, who in another book for children describes what
                          we are to believe Queen Margherita desired at court:

                             Do you want to know what pizza is? It’s a flattened piece of leavened bread,
                             toasted in an oven, topped with a sauce made with a bit of everything. That black
                             of the toasted bread, that whitish garlic and anchovies, that yellow-green of the
                             oil and fried herbs, and those red pieces of tomato here and there give the pizza
                             an air of complicated grime which corresponds perfectly with that of its seller.18

                          Of particular note is how the ingredients’ colors combine to form anything but the
                          tricolore. Collodi was a Florentine, of course, so vulnerable to accusations of
                          prejudice. One might expect a less critical opinion from a native Neapolitan of the
                          day; however, in Il ventre di Napoli (The Underbelly of Naples), Matilde Serao, a
                          prominent journalist who had in 1884 written a series of exposés on the poorest
                          parts of Naples, describes pizza as:

                             made from a dense dough that burns but does not cook, and is covered with
                             almost-raw tomatoes, with garlic, with oregano, with pepper: these pizzas in
                             many pieces that cost one soldo are entrusted to a boy who walks around to sell
                             them on the street, on a movable table, and there he stays the whole day, with
                             these slices of pizza which freeze in the cold, which turn yellow in the sun, eaten
                             by the flies.19

                          Dickie notes that nineteenth-century Naples was famous for its cholera outbreaks,
         Food,            making it a city to fear rather than visit. The precise mechanisms by which cholera
         Culture
         Society
                      &   was transmitted were unknown (making it all the more terrifying), but it struck the
                          poor much more frequently, and “the most widely accepted hypothesis was that its
         volume 17        germs lurked in the fetid subsoil of the city. It was a theory that magnified visceral
         issue 1          fears about the notorious filth and squalor of the Neapolitan slums.”20 It was
         march 2014       precisely for this terrible risk of infection that Umberto was recognized as a “civilian


                                                                                                                     107
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                       2/12/13      15:48    Page 108



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                               hero” by the Neapolitans after his visit to cholera victims during the 1885 epidemic,
                                                                               and precisely for this reason that he lent his support to the demolition and
                                                                               reconstruction of those crowded quarters, the beginning of which he and Margherita
                                                                               returned to celebrate in 1889.
                                                                                  Dickie finds no mention of the meeting in the press of the day; he therefore
                                                                               doubts that the queen would actually have eaten the pizza, but rather concludes that
                                                                               her bestowing her royal imprimatur on the dish made political and human sense,
                                                                               equating it with Princess Diana’s embracing of AIDS victims. It is fair to say that in
                                                                               1889, it is unlikely that any Italian queen—or any other member of Italy’s elite—
                                                                               would have wanted to try pizza.

                                                                                   From Via Chiaia to Capodimonte
                                                                               While the name of the pizza is ultimately “Margherita,” the true protagonist of this
                                                                               story is Raffaele Esposito. Who was Raffaele Esposito? Curiously, while all accounts
                                                                               are unanimous in declaring his celebrity (even before his encounter with the queen),
                                                                               which pizzeria he owned is much less certain. In first decades of the nineteenth
                                                                               century, Pietro Calicchio opened a pizzeria in Via Chiaia called “Pietro … e basta
                                                                               così” (Pietro … and that’s enough).21 In 1883, his descendent, Ferdinando Calicchio,
                                                                               sold the pizzeria to Raffaele Esposito, who that year requested permission from
                                                                               the chief of police of Naples to change the name of the pizzeria to “Pizzeria della
                                                                               Regina d’Italia” (“Pizzeria of the Queen of Italy”)—a full six years before the
                                                                               supposed royal encounter.22 While Raffaele Esposito married Maria Giovanna Brandi
                                                                               (daughter of pizzaiolo Giovanni Brandi) in 1877, her name did not grace the sign in
                                                                               front of the pizzeria until her nephews, Giovanni and Pasquale Brandi, assumed
                                                                               ownership in 1932. Since then, two other families have owned the pizzeria, but the
                                                                               name has remained Brandi.
                                                                                   Thus, while the name of the pizzeria at the time of the queen’s visit in 1889 was
                                                                               “Pizzeria della Regina d’Italia,” there is confusion in the various accounts. Helstosky,
                                                                               in the account that opens this article, refers to Esposito as the owner of Pizzeria
                                                                               Brandi. Benincasa,23 La Cecla24 and Minervini25 all assume that the name of the
                                                                               pizzeria had not changed when it changed owners, describing Raffaele Esposito as
                                                                               the owner of the pizzeria “Pietro … e basta così.” Buonassi26 and Harper-Faccioli27
                                                                               give the pizzeria’s name as “Pietro il Pizzaiolo.” Benincasa displays a photograph
                                                                               (Figure 1) of the inside of the Pizzeria Brandi, where hanging next to the famous
                                                                               letter from the queen’s chamberlain we see a large, broken sign that reads [P]izzeria
                                                                               della [Reg]ina d’Italia. This is not, as Benincasa suggests in the caption, “a fragment
                                                                               of a commemorative marble tablet placed [in 1889] inside the pizzeria, at that time
                                                                               called ‘Pietro e … basta così’”28—the tablet is far too big to be commemorative—
                                                                               but more likely the original sign for the pizzeria, which Raffaele Esposito had
                                                                               changed to the “Pizzeria della Regina d’Italia” in 1883 and which bore this name
                                                                               until its cession to the Brandi brothers in 1932.
                                                                                   There seems little doubt about the celebrity of the pizzeria or its owner at the
                                                                               time: Minervini, uses the adjective “celebrated,” Gentilcore29 “famous,” Dickie
                                                                               “renowned,”30 while Pandiani deems Esposito “the most famous pizzaiolo [of the
                                                                               period].”31 That said, contemporary documentation regarding Esposito’s fame is


                                                                             108
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1    2/12/13        15:48      Page 109




                          Fig. 1: A Photograph of the Interior of the Pizzeria Brandi from the 1990s. Note the
                          Framed Letter from the Queen’s Chamberlain.
                          From Gabriela Benicasa’s La pizza napoletana: Mito, storia e poesia. Used with the kind permission of
                          Guida Editori.



                          not forthcoming: as Antonio Mattozzi shows in his impeccably researched volume
                          on pizza in Naples, the city had over sixty pizzerias in 1889. If the “Pizzeria of the
                          Queen of Italy” was to be one of the three pizzerias active in the nineteenth century
                          to survive into the twentieth, it was likely less due to the quality of the pizzas and
                          more to the managerial ability of its owners and, even more importantly, its
                          strategic position. Mattozzi underlines the fact that there were likely many other
                          able and “illustrious” pizzaioli in these years, but they did not have the fortune to
                          have pizzerias near main streets.32 None of these histories of the monster
                          describe the pizzeria in Via Chiaia (or its owner) as having received any notable
                          award, nor do they list the establishment as the most successful of its type, hence
                          we can conclude that the fame attributed to Raffaele Esposito was post-1889,
                          perhaps even posthumous.

                              One, Three or Many Pizzas?
                          How many pizzas did Raffaele Esposito prepare that summer night in the oven just
         Food,
         Culture
         Society
                      &   outside the Palace of Capodimonte, if he was indeed there to prepare them? Again
                          one finds varying accounts: Pandiani mentions the canonical tomato, mozzarella
         volume 17        and basil (seemingly created ad hoc for this event) in addition to “other types of
         issue 1          pizza,”33 while Minervini mentions “many” pizzas, although most of the more
         march 2014       serious histories of the pizza speak of three different pizzas. Accounts vary as to


                                                                                                                              109
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                      2/12/13        15:48   Page 110



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                               which three pizzas were prepared, but the three most commonly described are a
                                                                               pizza with lard, another with anchovies, and a third with tomato sauce, mozzarella
                                                                               cheese and a sprig of basil.
                                                                                  There is also a possibility of the misattribution of accolades. While Helstosky’s
                                                                               account omits Esposito’s wife, many retellings of the famous encounter between
                                                                               queen and subject include her. Raffaele Esposito is accompanied in these accounts
                                                                               by Maria Giovanna Brandi, herself descended from a family of pizza-makers. While
                                                                               the accounts disagree what her name was—Benincasa “Pasqualina,”34 Buonassi
                                                                               “Donna Rosina”35 —Cozzi (one of the few to get her name right) implies that it was
                                                                               her, not Raffaele, who gave the pizza its final touch, the sprig of basil.36
                                                                                  These details seem to be alternately both confirmed and disproven by a series
                                                                               of documents. That three pizzas—not one, not “many”—were made is confirmed
                                                                               by the thank-you note from the “House of Her Majesty” that was sent on June 11,
                                                                               1889 and which still hangs in the Pizzeria Brandi (Figure 2). It reads:

                                                                                   House of Her Majesty
                                                                                   Capodimonte
                                                                                   11 June 1889
                                                                                   Inspection Office of the Mouth

                                                                                   Most esteemed Sig. Raffaele Esposito Brandi. I confirm that the three types of
                                                                                   pizza prepared by you for her Royal Highness the Queen were found to be
                                                                                   excellent.

                                                                                   Please believe me to be
                                                                                   Most devoted
                                                                                   Galli Camillo
                                                                                   Head of the Services of the Table of the Royal House37

                                                                               Finally, we have documentary evidence, if not of the ingredients or that the queen
                                                                               actually tried the pizza, that at least that she approved of the effort, and had the
                                                                               head of the royal household’s gastronomic office (“Office of the Mouth” in
                                                                               nineteenth-century parlance) send an appreciative note. Although this note does
                                                                               not specify the ingredients of the various pizzas, we can assume that if the meeting
                                                                               happened, it was quite possible that one of the pizzas was red, white and green.
                                                                                  Another documentary certainty is that while the name “monster” may
                                                                               have been a burst of Raffaele Esposito’s marketing creativity, such a colorful and
                                                                               not-coincidentally patriotic combination of ingredients was certainly not a novelty.
                                                                               Indeed, Emanuele Rocco, in his essay-vignette “Il pizzajulo,” describes a pizza
                                                                               topped with “basilico, muzzarella e pomodoro,” the three canonical ingredients. The
                                                                               essay appeared in a volume about customs in Naples published in 1853, thirty-six
                                                                               years prior to the supposed meeting of Esposito and the queen, and the former’s
                                                                               “invention” of the monster for the latter.38




                                                                             110
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1    2/12/13        15:48      Page 111




                          Fig. 2: The Famous Letter from Camillo Galli, Head of “Services of the Table” for
                          Queen Margherita.
                          From Gabriela Benicasa’s La pizza napoletana: Mito, storia e poesia. Used with the kind permission of
                          Guida Editori.


                              A Royal Thank-You Note?
                          “By appointment to her/his royal highness the Queen/King of…” was a much-
                          vaunted if perhaps dubiously effective method of reassuring a wary clientele of a
                          food product’s quality. “If it’s good enough for the king and queen…” was the
                          reasoning that the savvy producer wanted to implant in the mind of the potential
                          customer. Many historians of pizza, without citing the abovementioned letter from
                          Camillo Galli directly, bend its text into a kind of royal permission. Buonassi
                          explicitly attributes Raffaele Esposito and Rosina [sic] Brandi’s haste to go to the
                          palace to their desire to become “purveyors to the royal court.”39 The note is often
                          referred to as having been written by the queen herself, not by Galli, and as having
                          recognized the name “monster” or giving explicit permission to use this
                          name for the pizza. As the text above makes plain, this is not the case.
         Food,
         Culture
         Society
                      &      Many late nineteenth-century food producers sent samples to the royal
                          household and requested permission to use the royal seal on their stores or
         volume 17        advertisements. Judging from the number of successful supplicants whose requests
         issue 1          and the responses to those requests are preserved in a heavy archival box labeled
         march 2014       “Concessioni brevetti di regio stemma” (Concession of Licenses [for use] of royal


                                                                                                                              111
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                        2/12/13      15:48     Page 112



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                               seal), it would seem that this permission was frequently granted. Curiously,
                                                                               however, there is no permission granted (nor application for such a license) for the
                                                                               use of the name “monster” to anyone, Raffaele Esposito or otherwise. What
                                                                               one does find in that box, in File 7, folder letter “E,” is the following (Figure 3):

                                                                                   Esposito Raffaele of Naples, merchant of alcoholic spirits with a store in Port
                                                                                   Street no. 191 and a warehouse in San Bartolomeo Street no. 56, having been
                                                                                   awarded the Silver Medal, Second Class, at the International Maritime
                                                                                   Exposition in this city for having displayed liqueurs of his own making, thus
                                                                                   fulfills a duty of offering to Your Majesty a case of assorted liqueurs, so that
                                                                                   the clemency of Your Majesty will deign to try them, and thereafter having
                                                                                   obtained the honor of sovereign hospitality, Your Highness will concede him
                                                                                   the Certificate of Purveyor to the Royal House, in order to have a more
                                                                                   significant encouragement.

                                                                                   He very much hopes to obtain from Your Majesty the singular grace.

                                                                                   Naples 29 June 1871

                                                                                   Raffaele Esposito, Supplicant as above40

                                                                               Another document in the folder, apparently a draft of the response to Esposito,
                                                                               grants him permission to display the royal seal permanently. Note that the king in
                                                                               question is Victor Emanuel II, not Umberto I, and that the year is 1871, a full
                                                                               eighteen years before the supposed meeting of Esposito and the royals. While it is
                                                                               not certain that this Raffaele Esposito is the “famous” pizzaiolo, the latter is
                                                                               mentioned in a number of documents as being a merchant of wine.
                                                                                   Even more remarkable than the presence of this document is the absence of any
                                                                               record of Camillo Galli’s correspondence with Esposito. In the State Archives in
                                                                               Naples, among the documents belonging to the collection of the Royal House, there
                                                                               are dusty, oversized books that record all communications, internal and external.
                                                                               In them one finds twenty-four notations for June 11, 1889. They include a response
                                                                               to a certain “Anastasia, Caterina (neé Moretti)—Subject: Request for an educational
                                                                               pension for her son Antonio,” as well as an answer to a request for payment of the
                                                                               Prince of Syracuse’s allowance (protocol number 3072, sent to Capodimonte) and
                                                                               payment for the linen washers, again at Capodimonte.41 There is no record of any
                                                                               letter from Camillo Galli, or anyone else, to Raffaele Esposito.
                                                                                   This lack of entry could be an oversight, but it demands a thorough examination
                                                                               of the document—the supposed “thank-you note”—which lacks any external
                                                                               confirmation. The reader is invited to take a second look at the supposed letter
                                                                               from Camillo Galli to Raffaele Esposito (Figure 2). Several details raise doubts about
                                                                               this document’s validity. First, the royal seal: while all other official correspondence
                                                                               examined by the present author has a pre-printed typographical seal, the seal on
                                                                               this letter is stamped. In addition, the royal seal is at the bottom of the page,
                                                                               uncentered, and several degrees off vertical. A careful comparison of the seal with
                                                                               those in an essay on the evolution of the official seal of Italy (reprinted in the official



                                                                             112
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1    2/12/13        15:48       Page 113




                          Fig. 3: Raffaele Esposito’s Request to King Victor Immanuel for Permission to Use
                          the Royal Seal on his Wine and Liquor store.
                          Reproduced with the permission of the Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Events.

                           Review of the Italian State Archives) reveals that the “thank-you note” has a seal
                           without an official match. Even a cursory glance at Figure 4 shows that the “seal”
                           on the letter (Figure 2) matches none of the historic official seals, much less seal
                           H (the same as the one from the real Camillo Galli’s letter) or seal A (the royal seal
                           from 1870 to 1890).
                               This begs the question of whether Galli himself was a fiction; however, a
                           document that lists the table services’ personnel at the Palace of Capodimonte for
                           the queen’s visit in May/June 1889 has Galli at its head (Figure 5).42 The
                           presumption that the real-life Galli wrote the letter hanging in the Pizzeria Brandi
                           is easily dispelled by examining a letter from Camillo Galli himself43 in the Archives
                           in Rome (Figure 6). Note that this is official stationery from the “Office of the Service
         Food,             of the Mouth,” and that the calligraphy is obviously different, even from a distance
         Culture
         Society
                      &    of several feet. There are eight words common to both letters, in addition to the
                           signatures themselves: a simple comparison of these makes it clear that the authors
         volume 17         of these letters were two different people. Given these facts—the fake seal, the
         issue 1           lack of a protocol, and the different handwriting—we can safely conclude that the
         march 2014        letter in the Pizzeria Brandi is a forgery.


                                                                                                                    113
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                            2/12/13        15:48      Page 114



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                               Fig. 4: A comparison of the seal from the “thank-you note” and the various seals
                                                                               from 1870 to 1944: (A) Seal of the House of Savoy (1870–1890); (B) Seal of the
                                                                               House of Savoy (1890–1929); (C) Seal of the House of Savoy (1890–1929,
                                                                               alternative version); (D) Seal of the Kingdom of Italy (1890); (E) Seal of the King of
                                                                               Italy (1890); (F) “small seal” (1890); Fascist Seal (1929–1944); and (H) Seal from
                                                                               Camillo Galli’s letter from the Italian State Archives.




                                                                               Fig. 5: A list of the staff at the Capodimonte Palace for the occasion of Queen
                                                                               Margherita’s 1889 visit.
                                                                               Reproduced with the permission of the Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Events.




                                                                             114
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1    2/12/13        15:48       Page 115




                          Fig. 6: A Letter from Camillo Galli from the Italian State Archives (Signature Inset).
                          Reproduced with the permission of the Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Events.


                          The monster Story: The Savoys’ Colonial
                          Invention?
                          In his introduction (or, more literally translated, “premise”) to his history of pizza
                          and pizzaioli in Naples, Antonio Mattozzi makes clear that there is:

                              is a kind of journalist who … in getting close to history, looks for the anecdote
                              rather than the document, the wisecrack and the joke rather than the pure and
                              simple narration of the facts, often contaminating the real events with elements
                              often legendary and fantastical. In this way one presents as realistic facts those
                              which are instead to a great degree invented.44

                          The commonly accepted story behind the monster is a clear example of
                          what Mattozzi would like to see avoided; less clear is the origin of this story.
                              Of the official historians of the monster, the most prolix, Gabriele
         Food,
         Culture
         Society
                      &   Benincasa, attributes the popularity of the pizza to two convergent actions: “that
                          of the Royal House which ordered the pizza in order to then diffuse the news that
         volume 17        the sovereigns shared the same tastes of the Neapolitan lower-class [popolino],
         issue 1          and that of the pizzaiolo Esposito to promote the quality of his pizza which was ‘fit
         march 2014       for a queen.’” As to the first part of this formulation, Benincasa suggests that it


                                                                                                                    115
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                        2/12/13      15:48    Page 116



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                               was perhaps an “initiative, let’s call it purely political, less likely suggested by a
                                                                               lady of the court than by some advisor of the Savoys, in an attempt to contribute,
                                                                               even through certain popular acts of the sovereigns, to get beyond the declared
                                                                               hostility of the Neapolitans towards the new reigning house.”45
                                                                                   Other historians agree: John Dickie also sees a national unification project—an
                                                                               official one—behind the story of the invention of the pizza. David Gentilcore’s
                                                                               comment is representative of recent comment on the supposed episode and merits
                                                                               quoting at length:

                                                                                   Whether the pizza was invented for Queen Margherita or whether Esposito
                                                                                   simply used an old recipe is unclear, but the latter is more likely. In any case,
                                                                                   what is important is that a new culinary tradition was “invented” in the process
                                                                                   … As an “invented tradition,” the monster combined several elements:
                                                                                   the populism of the new Savoyard monarchy at the expense of the vanquished
                                                                                   Bourbons; the triumph of local, popular cooking over the imported French
                                                                                   cuisine; and the Italianizing of a Neapolitan dish in the shadow of the
                                                                                   Risorgimento.46

                                                                               The royals were indeed interested in ingratiating themselves with the inhabitants
                                                                               of the former Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, twenty years after the end of the brutal
                                                                               repression of the revolts in southern Italy. In a biography of Queen Margherita,
                                                                               Romano Bracalini notes that as they were determined to win over the southerners
                                                                               to the new national monarchy, the Savoy had gone south in deference to a political
                                                                               dynasty that was becoming Italian from “Piedmontese.”47 Thus, most commentators
                                                                               would ascribe this pseudo-encounter to the sort of “invention of tradition” first
                                                                               described by Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger. In the seminal collection on the
                                                                               subject, Hobsbawm defines invented tradition as including “‘traditions’ actually
                                                                               invented, constructed and formally instituted and those merging in a less easily
                                                                               traceable manner within a brief and datable period.”48 Hobsbawm and Ranger’s
                                                                               book (and much research based on it) focuses on invention of tradition by European
                                                                               monarchies for their subjects, domestic or colonial. Hobsbawm wrote that invented
                                                                               tradition “give[s] to any desired change (or resistance to innovation) the sanction
                                                                               of precedent, social continuity and natural law as expressed in history.”49 Given the
                                                                               desire of the Savoy monarchy to represent itself as the rightful heir to the Bourbon
                                                                               monarchy, one would expect that had this meeting been invented by the royal house,
                                                                               it would have used the most effective mediatic instrument at its disposal to
                                                                               publicize it: the Agenzia Stefani.
                                                                                   The Agenzia Stefani was the fourth of the European press agencies to be founded
                                                                               after the French Havas, the German Wolff and the English Reuter. It enjoyed a cozy
                                                                               and mutually beneficial relationship with the Italian government: Agenzia Stefani
                                                                               was able to send all its dispatches to its paying subscribers (financial institutions,
                                                                               newspapers, etc) for free, using the state-controlled telegraph system, and received
                                                                               all telegrams sent to it for free. In return, the agency had to send all its political and
                                                                               economic dispatches for free to the relevant government offices, transmit for free
                                                                               all the government’s bulletins, and send all the results of parliamentary debates.50


                                                                             116
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1   2/12/13      15:48    Page 117




                          Given the relationship between Stefani and the Italian government, all of the
                          agency’s dispatches about the government or the royal family were published in
                          the daily Gazette of the Kingdom of Italy, in a section appropriately entitled “non
                          official part.” A careful review of these semi-official telegrams from the period May
                          21 to June 18, 1889 reveals that while there are many that deal with the royals’ visit
                          to Naples, and that the local papers used these dispatches for their articles,51 there
                          is no mention of any visit to the queen by a pizzaiolo.
                              The queen did have a special reception at which there were audiences and new
                          presentations. For admission, women were instructed to contact Her Eminence the
                          Marquise of Villamarina, men the Marquis. Women were instructed to present
                          themselves in “toilette di visita” (elegant haircut and clothing), men with a formal
                          coat and suit.52 Although one might assume that, given the instructions on protocol,
                          this encounter was limited to the elite of Naples (not its pizzaioli), we find
                          confirmation in a newspaper article from the day after the reception: “The reception
                          yesterday at the Palace of Capodimonte was, for the most noble part of our society,
                          a veritable party…”53 It does not seem, then, that there was any official attempt to
                          create a myth out of royal acceptance of popular foodways—given the culinary
                          culture at court, pizza as a food was simply too distant, even for propaganda
                          purposes.

                          The Counterfeiter Revealed and Conclusions: Folklore,
                          Fakelore, Folklure, History
                          Thus, invented tradition seems to be the wrong category in which to place the origin
                          myth of the monster. Is the story then simply another example of what
                          folklorist Richard Dorson derisively terms “fakelore,” or “the spurious and synthetic
                          writings under the claim that they are genuine folklore,” stories that are “not
                          collected in the field but are rewritten from earlier literary and journalistic sources
                          in an endless chain of regurgitation, or they may even be made out of whole cloth.”54
                          It is beyond the scope of this article to comment on the vigorous debate among
                          academics in the folklore field about the (in)existent boundaries between folklore
                          and fakelore.55 There are, however, a number of unsubstantiated reports of Bourbon
                          monarchs eating pizza in Naples, enough that it seems reasonable to assume that
                          this story was part of folklore in Naples in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
                          centuries. In 1914, Salvatore Di Giacomo, a journalist who worked in Naples for
                          the Pungolo, wrote an account of a visit to a café where his waiter was the son of
                          pizzaiolo Domenico Testa. In the account, the son tells Di Giacomo a story nearly
                          identical to that of Esposito: Ferdinando II summoning Domenico Testa to the palace
                          at Capodimonte; the pizzaiolo making pizzas for the queen and her ladies, who had
                          tired of court food; and Testa being rewarded with a royal diploma that allowed
                          him to be called “Munzù,” the title for a chef of the era.56
         Food,
         Culture
         Society
                      &       The first reference to a Savoyard monarch in this story is not after the 1889
                          visit but rather nine years prior. In 1880, a version of the story appeared in the
         volume 17        Roman newspaper Il Bersagliere: a summons from Queen Margherita brings a well-
         issue 1          known pizzaiolo to the court, where he prepares eight large pizzas. The crown
         march 2014       prince gets impatient and eats a piece, followed by the queen, who tastes all eight.


                                                                                                                    117
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                       2/12/13      15:48    Page 118



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                               Acclaim is immediate, and the pizzaiolo asks only for permission to put the royal
                                                                               seal on his pizzeria. The article even gives us the date of this event, June 14, 1880,
                                                                               as well as the name of the pizzaiolo: Giovanni Brandi, Raffaele Esposito’s father-in-
                                                                               law.57 The story has many of the same elements as the canonical version that opens
                                                                               this paper. Another account, written in 1935 by a former royal cook, gives a near-
                                                                               identical story—the royal summons from Margherita in “1882 or 1883,” cooking at
                                                                               Capodimonte, concession of the royal seal—but with a certain “Don Gennarino” as
                                                                               the hero and inventor of the monster.58
                                                                                   The Margherita-Esposito account is not recorded in print until the late 1930s or
                                                                               early 1940s. The current owners of the Pizzeria Brandi distribute a flyer that
                                                                               reproduces a newspaper article from 1929, “Pronto c’ ‘a pala,” by Michele Parise.
                                                                               Parise, in a rambling story about his visit to the Pizzeria Brandi, recounts in a mix
                                                                               of standard Italian and Neapolitan dialect how one of the Brandi brothers stops at
                                                                               his table and tells him the story of the invention of the monster. The text
                                                                               that follows provides many of the details we are familiar with—the royal visit of
                                                                               1889, the invitation to Capodimonte, “many” pizzas including the tricolor one, the
                                                                               “thank-you note”—and reproduces the note sent to Esposito, which we know can
                                                                               be confidently considered a forgery.59 The flyer gives this article’s date as November
                                                                               1, 1929, but this seems anachronistic because the Brandi brothers did not own the
                                                                               pizzeria that year: Mattozzi cites police documents that show that the pizzeria had
                                                                               been sold by Maria Giovanna Brandi to Pietro Pagliarulo in 1925, only to be inherited
                                                                               in 1932 by Giovanna Brandi (Maria Giovanna Brandi’s niece), who ceded it to her
                                                                               brothers.60
                                                                                   Given Esposito’s request for the royal seal on his wine and liquor store in 1871,
                                                                               and his change of the name of the pizzeria in 1883, we can assume that, as Mattozzi
                                                                               says, while “we don’t know whether [Esposito] was a fervent supporter of the new
                                                                               Savoy monarchy, it’s certain nevertheless that he had to have a lot of ambition and
                                                                               a keen sense of marketing. … Even if in those years the names with ‘Roma’ and
                                                                               ‘Italia’ were all over commercial signs, the fact that his sign referred to the queen
                                                                               says a lot about his dreams and his plans.”61
                                                                                   If Raffaele Esposito reused folklore to sell a product (namely, his newly
                                                                               christened pizza), this invention would shift from simple fakelore to the subcategory
                                                                               of “folklure,” which Sullenberger gives as the “calculated association of folkloristic
                                                                               concepts with manufactured products.”62 While this term is usually associated with
                                                                               industrial products, one could just as easily apply it to selling pizzas. But was it
                                                                               Raffaele Esposito who forged the famous royal thank-you note? The answer is, I
                                                                               believe, in the forgery itself. Speaking about the Brandi brothers in the 1930s,
                                                                               Mattozzi says “through ups and downs, brought back to the highest level the
                                                                               glorious tradition of the pizzeria, accentuating its prestige with frequent important
                                                                               visits [by celebrities].” Though Raffaele Esposito was illiterate,63 in the two official
                                                                               letters that he had written for him, he had his name signed as “Raffaele Esposito.”64
                                                                               The reader is invited to reread the forged letter to Esposito from Camillo Galli
                                                                               (Figure 2): note that it is addressed to “Sig. Raffaele Esposito Brandi.” Italian men,
                                                                               in the nineteenth century as now, did not take their wives’ surnames: the surname
                                                                               “Brandi” in this letter would not have been written by Raffaele Esposito.


                                                                             118
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1   2/12/13      15:48     Page 119




                              None of the histories of the monster that reproduce the forged letter
                          comment on this incongruence. Many simply delete the word “Brandi” in their
                          transcription, having recognized that there is something amiss. Dickie and
                          Minervini, who otherwise give the full text, both leave out the extraneous “Brandi,”
                          addressing the letter to “Sig. Raffaele Esposito.”65 The abovementioned flyer from
                          the Pizzeria Brandi gives the name as “Sig. Raffaele Esposito (Brandi),” perhaps
                          giving rise to a recent journalistic inaccuracy in Italy’s premier daily, La Repubblica,
                          which names “Raffaele Esposito Brandi” as the monster’s inventor.66
                              The extraneous surname is hardly proof but at least a basis for a reasonable
                          conjecture: the Brandi brothers, in the midst of the Great Depression, desperate to
                          raise their pizzeria’s visibility, decide to bend a “family myth” to their advantage.
                          They somehow find the name of Camillo Galli, decide on a plausible date, and have
                          a believable (though not terribly accurate) facsimile of the royal seal made in rubber.
                          Some old paper and a pen (an error here too in not using a fountain pen),
                          exaggeratedly elegant script, and a forgery is made.67 Their rather clumsy attempt
                          was obviously passable: the earliest written account of the letter on the wall, if we
                          discount the 1929 date for his article, is Parise’s 1941 book. The forgery has been
                          accepted at face value for over seventy years.68
                              Though much has been made of the value of the tricolor pizza for the purposes
                          of national unification—especially of late, with secessionist parties in parliament
                          and the 150th anniversary of “unification” bitterly contested by Italians from all
                          over the peninsula—it is clear that this myth has had a bottom-up rather than top-
                          down flow. Though beginning as folklore, the fakelore/folklure story of Raffaele
                          Esposito (and, occasionally his wife, under whatever name) has moved back into the
                          realm of genuine folklore, as an urban or contemporary legend. Folklore scholar
                          and international expert on urban legends, Jan Harold Brunvand, has written that
                          urban legends share “a strong basic story-appeal, a foundation in actual belief, and
                          a meaningful message or ‘moral.’”69 Brunvand suggests that these urban legends
                          propagate especially quickly and are accepted as fact when they respond to a
                          certain sociological need. Perhaps this example began as a simple attempt to
                          popularize one pizzeria at the expense of others: the Brandi brothers drew on a
                          historical fact—their ancestor’s permission to use the royal seal on his wine store,
                          the name of the pizzeria—and wove it into an existing legend of royals-eating-
                          commoners’ food. The myth had such narrative appeal that it developed auto-
                          catalytic momentum, propelling it forward into cookbooks, travelogues and tourist
                          guides, as well as food histories.
                              This research has answered a simple question—“Is the monster myth
                          true?”—which reinforces the boundaries between folklore and history. The facts
                          and arguments marshaled in this study suggest, beyond a reasonable doubt, that
         Food,            the tradition of a pizza called Margherita has nothing to do with a meeting between
         Culture
         Society
                      &   pizzaiolo Raffaele Esposito and the former Queen of Italy. Having answered that
                          question, this article has thus arrived at a historical cul-de-sac. An ultimately much
         volume 17        more interesting question than the story’s veracity is its “enfactualization,” its
         issue 1          movement from folklore through fakelore/folklure into the realm of history.70
         march 2014       Although some academics worry about historians revealing myths as such and


                                                                                                                     119
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                             2/12/13       15:48      Page 120



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                               withdrawing them “from circulation without the need to consult the communities,”71
                                                                               it is safe to say that given the sheer textual weight of this story, as well as its
                                                                               narrative appeal, this article in no way threatens the vitality of the Esposito-
                                                                               Margherita legend.72 To the contrary, one might ask whether the volume of texts on
                                                                               the tricolor pizza’s birth and their vitality threaten history as a discipline.
                                                                                   If historians have been too eager to see a convenient example of semi-colonial
                                                                               “invention of tradition,” is this simply Menocchio’s revenge, whereby oral tradition
                                                                               and popular creativity flow upwards into the academy?73 Or is it, like the
                                                                               astoundingly resilient myth about the (supposed) plethora of Inuit words for snow,
                                                                               a worrisome object lesson on the “hazards of superficial scholarship”?74 Given the
                                                                               relative unimportance of this non-episode to Italy’s history, as well as most
                                                                               scholars’ skeptical regard for the story, one can accept the story as just more
                                                                               cheese, though without the worms. More work is needed to trace the pizza-eating-
                                                                               sovereign trope backwards, but also to investigate the sociological reasons for the
                                                                               myth’s popularity. A better understanding of both will come only with a more
                                                                               complete review of the cookbooks, travelogues and popular newspapers of the late
                                                                               nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, as well as with a deeper sociological
                                                                               analysis of both food myths and their propagation.

                                                                                   Acknowledgments
                                                                               The author would like to thank the staffs of the Archivio di Stato both of Rome and
                                                                               Naples, as well as Domenico Musci, Carmine Napoli, Antonio Mattozzi, Giovanna De
                                                                               Pascale, Peter Naccarato, Ernesto Livorni, Elgin Eckert, and two anonymous
                                                                               reviewers. Digital copies of all archival documents mentioned in this article are
                                                                               available from the author.

                                                                                   Zachary Nowak is the associate director for the Food Studies Program at the Umbra
                                                                                   Institute, and is in the doctoral program for American Studies at Harvard University.
                                                                                   His research interests center on the food myths, specifically those that both Italians and
                                                                                   foreigners have woven in the last fifty years about Italian food. He teaches courses in
                                                                                   food history and the possibility of sustainable food. The Umbra Institute, Via Bartolo 16,
                                                                                   Perugia 06123, Italy (znowak@umbra.org).


                                                                                      Notes


                                                                                   1 Carol Helstosky, Pizza: A Global History (London: Reaktion Books, 2008), p. 26. The
                                                                                     emphasis is in the original: the word pizzaiolo translates poorly but means “pizza-maker.”
                                                                                   2 “L’Italia è fatta. Restano da fare gli italiani.” Its constant repetition (and misattribution)
                                                                                     suggests its aptness. Cited in Edgar Holt, The Making of Italy: 1815–1870 (New York: Holt,
                                                                                     1971), p. 258.
                                                                                   3 An excellent source on the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies’ relative industrial advantage is
                                                                                     Carmine Colacino, “Industria e artigianato,” in Carmine Colacino, Alfonso Grasso, Andrea
                                                                                     Moletta, Antonio Pagano, Giuseppe Ressa, Alessandro Romano, Maria Russo, Marina
                                                                                     Salvadore and Maria Sarcinelli (eds), La storia proibita: Quando i Piemontesi invasero il
                                                                                     Sud (Naples: Controcorrente, 2001), pp. 35–50.



                                                                             120
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1    2/12/13      15:48      Page 121




                          4 All translations are mine unless otherwise stated. Antonio Gramsci, “Il lanzo ubriaco,” in
                             Valentino Gerratana and Antonio Santucci (eds) L’Ordine nuovo 1919–1920 (Turin: Einaudi,
                             1987), p. 422.
                          5 Gigi Di Fiore, Controstoria dell’unità d’Italia: Fatti e misfatti del Risorgimento (Milan:
                             Rizzoli, 2007), p. 259.
                          6 John Dickie, Delizia: The Epic History of the Italians and Their Food (London: Sceptre,
                             2007), pp. 200–10. Dickie’s account of the cholera epidemic and how pizza and Naples
                             were viewed at the time are fundamental to any history of pizza.
                          7 “[Pizza was] food of the poor, the borghesi, the artists, the nobles, even the king and queen
                             of Savoia, who were escorted one historic spring evening through the backstreets of the
                             city to a place where one Raffaele Esposito had been commissioned to cook la pizza for
                             their majesties, Umberto and Margherita.” Marlena de Blasi, Regional Foods of Southern
                             Italy (New York: Viking, 1999), p. 83.
                          8 The two newspapers of the day were Il Pungolo and Il Roma, both consultable at the
                             Biblioteca Nazionale di Napoli, Emeroteca Lucchesi. The Agenzia Stefani, the Italian
                             equivalent of Reuters of the day, will be the subject of comment below. Documents
                             pertaining to the royal visit can be found in the Archivio Centrale di Stato in Rome: Real
                             Casa, Div. Governo Interno, 1889, Busta 94, Fascicolo 4522.
                          9 “Cronaca: L’arrivo della Regina,” Il Pungolo [Naples], May 22, 1889.
                          10 “Cronaca: Il Re,” Il Pungolo [Naples], June 12, 1889.
                          11 Anonymous, [untitled article], Il Roma [Naples], 18 June 1889. The king had returned to
                             Capodimonte alone for a brief meeting with a parliamentarian.
                          12 David Gentilcore, Pomodoro! A History of the Tomato in Italy (New York: Columbia
                             University Press, 2010), p. 92.
                          13 Franco La Cecla, Pasta and Pizza, Translated by Lydia G. Cochrane (Chicago, IL: Prickly
                             Paradigm Press, 2007), p. 43. La Cecla gives no references for the queen’s desire for
                             different food at Capodimonte. He also repeats the story of Esposito using the old regime’s
                             ovens to make the pizzas, citing unspecified “documents.”
                          14 Maurizio Campiverdi and Francesco Ricciardi (eds), I menu del Quirinale: 150 anni di menu
                             per 15 Capi di Stato (Rome: Accademia italiana della cucina, 2011), p. 42.
                          15 Musci gives eight dishes, including Chicken Breasts à la Margherita and Consommé à la
                             Margherita. He states without a hint of irony that the culinary creation dedicated to Queen
                             Margherita which was immediately and universally popular and has lasted the longest
                             was, without a doubt, the Pasta Margherita (“Margherita mix”): egg yolks, confectioner’s
                             sugar, and lemon juice whipped for half an hour. Domenico Musci, Abbuffate reali: La
                             storia d’Italia attraverso i menu di Casa Savoia (Turin: Anake, 2007), p. 42.
                          16 Silvia De Lorenzo, Gianni Franceschi and Francesco Ricciardi (eds), 1861–2011: La cucina
                             nella formazione dell’identità nazionale (Milan: Accademia Italiana della Cucina, 2011), p.
                             269.
                          17 Dickie, Delizia, pp. 197–210. Peter Naccarato and Kathleen LeBesco, Culinary Capital
                             (New York: Berg, 2012).
         Food,            18 Carlo Collodi, Viaggio per l’Italia di Giannettino (Riordinato in un solo volume da Ferronio)
         Culture
         Society
                      &      (Biblioteca Bemporad: Firenze, 1923), p. 292.
                          19 Matilde Serao, Il ventre di Napoli (Rome: L’Unità, 1993), pp. 19–20.
         volume 17        20 Dickie, Delizia, p. 204.
         issue 1          21 Mattozzi notes that Pietro Calicchio’s pizzeria is not cited in the census of pizzerias of
         march 2014          1807, and the only date that is certain regarding his pizzeria is that his son, Ferdinando



                                                                                                                             121
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                               2/12/13        15:48      Page 122



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                                        was the owner in 1867. It was Ferdinando Calicchio who sold the pizzeria to Raffaele
                                                                                        Esposito in 1883. Curiously, according to several sources, the name “Pietro” survived
                                                                                        even after Pietro died, becoming a sort of nickname for every owner of the pizzeria
                                                                                        thereafter. Antonio Mattozzi, Una storia napoletana: Pizzerie e pizzaiuoli tra Sette e
                                                                                        Ottocento (Bra: Slow Food Editore: 2009), p. 112 and passim.
                                                                                   22   See the document in the Archivio di Stato di Napoli, Questura di Napoli, Archivio Generale,
                                                                                        Seconda serie, 1883, Fasc.2224. That permission was given is evident from a police list
                                                                                        of “public operations” (hotels, restaurants and pizzerias) from 1883, where Raffaele
                                                                                        Esposito is said to be operating “under the sign of ‘Pizzeria of the Queen of Italy.’” (Archivio
                                                                                        di Stato di Napoli, Questura di Napoli, Archivio Generale, Seconda serie, 1883, Fasc.1313)
                                                                                   23   Gabriele Benincasa, La pizza napoletana: Mito, storia e poesia (Naples: Alfredo Guida
                                                                                        Editore, 1992), p. 137.
                                                                               24       La Cecla, Pasta and Pizza, p. 43.
                                                                               25       Roberto Minvervini, Storia della pizza (Naples: Società Editrice Napoletana, 1973), p. 27.
                                                                               26       Rosario Buonassi, Pizza: The Dish, The Legend, p. 76.
                                                                               27       Douglas Harper and Patrizia Faccioli, The Italian Way: Food & Social Life (Chicago, IL:
                                                                                        University of Chicago Press, 2009), p. 299.
                                                                               28       Benincasa, La pizza napoletana, pp. 81–2. Photo reproduced with permission from the
                                                                                        publisher. Note the framed letter from the queen’s chamberlain next to the sign.
                                                                               29       Gentilcore, Pomodoro!, p. 92.
                                                                               30       Dickie, Delizia, p. 201.
                                                                               31       Paola Pandiani, Pane e pizza (Milan: Touring Club Italiano, 2004), p. 12.
                                                                               32       Antonio Mattozzi, Una storia napoletana, p. 113.
                                                                               33       Pandiani, Pane e pizza, p. 12.
                                                                               34       Benincasa, La pizza napoletana, p. 138.
                                                                               35       Rosario Buonassi, Pizza: The Dish, The Legend, p. 76.
                                                                               36       Tiziana Cozzi, “Cortei e sbandieratori per i 120 anni della pizza” La Repubblica ([Turin],
                                                                                        11 June 2009), p. 12.
                                                                               37       The original hangs in the Pizzeria Brandi in Naples. Benincasa displays a photocopy on p.
                                                                                        142 which the author has found to conform to the original, though the latter is quite faded.
                                                                                   38   Emanuele Rocco, “Il pizzajulo,” in Francesco de Bourcard (ed.) Usi e costumi di Napoli e
                                                                                        contorni descritti e depinti (Naples: Stabilimento Tipografico di Gaetano Nobile, 1853).
                                                                                   39   Rosario Buonassi, Pizza: The Dish, The Legend, p. 76.
                                                                                   40   Archivio Centrale di Stato, Rome, Real Casa, Divisione Prima, Segreteria Reale,
                                                                                        Concessioni Brevetti di Regio Stemma, Busta 7, Lettera E.
                                                                                   41   Archivio di Stato, Naples, Real Casa, Protocollo dell’amministrazione della Real Casa in
                                                                                        Napoli per l’anno 1889.
                                                                               42       Archivio Centrale di Stato in Rome: Real Casa, Div. Governo Interno, 1889, Busta 94,
                                                                                        Fascicolo 4522.
                                                                                   43   Archivio Centrale di Stato, Rome, Real Casa, Div. Governo Interno, Busta 100, Fascicolo
                                                                                        590.
                                                                                   44   Antonio Mattozzi, Una storia napoletana, p. 15.
                                                                                   45   Gabriele Benicasa, La pizza napoletana, pp. 138–9.
                                                                                   46   Gentilcore, Pomodoro!, p. 93. While Helstosky explicitly uses the word “legend” to describe
                                                                                        the story, Dickie and Gentilcore certainly both share her suspicion. The former begins the
                                                                                        section on the episode with the words, “There are few hard facts in the history of pizza,”
                                                                                        while the latter starts with the phrase, as already noted, “The story is that the queen…”



                                                                             122
06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1    2/12/13      15:48      Page 123




                          47 Romano Bracalini, La Regina Margherita: La Prima Donna sul Trono d’Italia (Milan: Rizzoli,
                             1985), p. 55.
                          48 Eric Hobsbawm, “Introduction: Invented Traditions,” in Eric Hobsbawm and Terence
                             Ranger (eds) The Invention of Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008),
                             p. 1.
                          49 Hobsbawm, “Introduction: Invented Traditions,” p. 2.
                          50 Sergio Lepri, Francesco Arbitrio and Giuseppe Cultrera, Informazione e potere in un secolo
                             di storia italiana: L’Agenzia Stefani da Cavour a Mussolini (Florence: Le Monnier, 2000),
                             p. 9.
                          51 Many newspaper articles are practically identical to the Stefani’s dispatches. It seems that
                             then, as now, harried editors indulged in time-saving cutting and pasting.
                          52 “Cronaca: S.M. la Regina,” Il Pungolo [Naples], June 6–7, 1889.
                          53 “Cronaca: Il Re a Napoli,” Il Pungolo [Naples], June 10–11, 1889.
                          54 Richard Dorson, “Fakelore,” Zeitschrift für Volkskunde 65 (1969), p. 60.
                          55 Cf. Ellen Stekert, “The False Issue of Folklore vs. “Fakelore’: Was Paul Bunyan a Hoax,”
                             Journal of Forest History 30 (1986), pp. 180–1.
                          56 Salvatore di Giacomo, Napoli: Figure e paesi e Luci e ombre napoletane, edited by
                             Romualdo Marrone (Rome: Newton, 1995 [1914]), pp. 141–2.
                          57 “Pizze alla napoletana” Il Bersagliere [Rome], June 19, 1880.
                          58 Amadeo Pettini, “Cento ricette del cuoco del Re” (Turin: Gazzetta del Popolo di Torino,
                             1935), p. 5.
                          59 Pizzeria Brandi, “Pronto c’ ‘a pala.” [undated flyer]. This undated promotional flyer has on
                             one side “Antica Pizzeria-Ristorante della Regina d’Italia. Casa fondata nel 1780. Brandi
                             di Vincenzo Pagnani,” and Parise’s story on the other. The present author did not find the
                             article in the Il Mezzogiorno of November 1, 1929, but Parise did republish his article in a
                             book called Finestra su Napoli, originally printed in 1941 by Editore Gaspare Casella,
                             reprinted in 2005 by Stamperia del Valentino (pp. 92–6). The current owners of the Pizzeria
                             Brandi have said that the date is wrong on the flyer; we can assume that this article did
                             in fact appear in the 1930s.
                          60 Mattozzi, Una storia napoletana, 120.
                          61 Ibid., pp. 118–19.
                          62 Tom Sullenberger, “Ajax Meets the Jolly Green Giant: Some Observations on the Use of
                             Folklore and Myth in American Mass Marketing,” Journal of American Folklore 87:343
                             (1974), p. 53.
                          63 Archivio di Stato di Napoli, Registri Matrimoni, 1877, Porto 50. The marriage certificate
                             was not signed as the couple was “unlettered.”
                          64 See Figure 3 as well as the request for the change of the pizzeria’s name (note 21).
                          65 In the Italian translation of Delizia, though, the text is “Sig. Raffaele Esposito (Brandi).”
                          66 Guido Andruetto, “Cortei e sbandieratori per i 120 anni della pizza” La Repubblica, Turin
                             Edition ([Turin], June 10, 2009), p. 15.
                          67 Interestingly, this forgery was later forged: Benincasa reproduces another version of the
         Food,               letter (which does not have the name “Brandi”), apparently found in a Parisian pizzeria
         Culture
         Society
                      &      opened by a distant relative of Esposito. Benincasa, La pizza napoletana, p. 143.
                          68 It is important to note that the current owners of Pizzeria Brandi were supportive of this
         volume 17           research, though they do not agree with its conclusions, believing the famous letter to be
         issue 1             genuine.
         march 2014       69 Jan Harold Brunvand, The Vanishing Hitchhiker: American Urban Legends and Their



                                                                                                                             123
     06 Nowak FCS 17.1:Layout 1                                                                         2/12/13       15:48     Page 124



Zachary Nowak ◊ Invented Tradition and the Origins of the monster




                                                                                  Meanings (New York: Norton, 2003), p. 10.
                                                                               70 The author is indebted to Ken Albala for this neologism.
                                                                               71 Charles Briggs, “The Politics of Discursive Authority in Research on the “Invention of
                                                                                  Tradition,’” Cultural Anthropology 11 (1996), p. 438.
                                                                               72 The present author has collected over thirty published textual variants; the internet groans
                                                                                  under the weight of countless others.
                                                                               73 See Carlo Ginzburg’s book The Cheese and The Worms: The Cosmos of a Sixteenth-Century
                                                                                  Miller, Translated by Anne Tedeschi and John Tedeschi (Baltimorem MD: Johns Hopkins
                                                                                  University Press, 1992), in which the author uses the trial records of the sixteenth-century
                                                                                  miller Mennocchio to show that culture is not simply an top-down process whereby elite
                                                                                  knowledge moves downward into the minds of the “folk.”
                                                                               74 Laura Martin, “‘Eskimo Words for Snow’: A Case Study in the Genesis and Decay of an
                                                                                  Anthropological Example,” American Anthropologist 88 (1986), p. 418. To be fair, Martin
                                                                                  describes how this myth originated in the academy and diffused outward into popular
                                                                                  culture, rather than vice versa.




                                                                             124




                                       View publication stats
