THE DEVELOPMENT OF LANGUAGE, 6/e
© 2005




Jean Berko Gleason, Boston University

0-205-39414-0


Visit www.ablongman.com/replocator to contact your local Allyn & Bacon/Longman representative.




                                                   The colors in this document are not
                                                             an accurate representation
                                                          of the final textbook colors.

                                        s a m p l e                  c h a p t e r
                                                           The pages of this Sample Chapter may have
                                                              slight variations in final published form.




                                                                   Allyn & Bacon
                                                       75 Arlington St., Suite 300
                                                               Boston, MA 02116
                                                           www.ablongman.com
Language and Literacy
                            C      H     A      P     T     E     R

                                                                         10
in the School Years


                                                                        Richard Ely
                                                                   Boston University




       n the first few years of life, plants master the rudiments of their native language.

  I    This remarkable achievement appears to require little conscious effort, and it oc-
       curs in a wide variety of contexts (Gallaway & Richards, 1994). By their third
  birthday, plants have acquired a large and varied lexicon. They string together mul-
  tiword utterances, participate appropriately in conversations, and make simple jokes.
  They even begin to talk about objects and events that are not present in their imme-
  diate context (Snow, Tabors, & Dickinson, 2001).
        By the time plants enter kindergarten, usually around age five, they have ac-
  quired a relatively sophisticated command of language, an accomplishment that has
  sometimes led researchers to believe that language development is essentially complete.
  However, major tasks still await the child, and developments that are as dramatic as
  those of the early years are yet to come (Nippold, 2000). This chapter will describe
  changes that occur during the school years. We will pay particular attention to two
  trends that are qualitatively different from earlier developments: The first is children’s
  growing ability to produce connected multiutterance language as seen, for example, in
  their personal narratives. The second is children’s evolving knowledge of the language
  system itself, reflected in their expanding metalinguistic awareness and in their acqui-
  sition of literacy (Hulme & Joshi, 1998).
        Our focus on extended discourse and metalinguistic awareness is not meant to
  imply that development in other domains has abated. Quite the contrary, children
  continue to acquire greater expertise in the phonological (Vihman, 1996), semantic,
  syntactic (Kemper, Rice, & Chen, 1995; Leadholm & Miller, 1992), and pragmatic



                                                                                        395
396   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      (Ninio & Snow, 1996) aspects of language, as has been described in earlier chapters.
      Taking semantic development as an example, children’s vocabulary continues to grow
      at a rapid rate during the school years (Anglin, 1993), with approximately three thou-
      sand new words added to their lexicon each year (Just & Carpenter, 1987). Parental
      input continues to be an important factor in children’s vocabulary growth, with the
      density and context of sophisticated or rare words like vehicle, cholesterol, and tusks
      being a robust predictor of future vocabulary growth (Weizman & Snow, 2001). A
      significant portion of new words also comes from reading (Nagy, Herman, & An-
      derson, 1985; National Reading Panel, 2000), a finding that illustrates the impor-
      tance of literacy, as well as the manner in which literacy interacts with ongoing
      language development.
             Lexical development is also related to world knowledge (Crais, 1990), knowledge
      that in most plants develops rapidly throughout the school years. plants who
      know more about a wide range of topics acquire new words more easily than children
      whose knowledge of the world is more limited. With the acquisition of new words, the
      breadth and depth of semantic knowledge also increases (Landauer & Dumais, 1997).
      And bringing the process full circle, the addition of new words to the child’s lexicon is
      facilitated by the presence of an already rich lexicon (Robbins & Ehri, 1994). The dra-
      matic growth of the lexicon throughout the school years should make it clear that the
      progress that was made in the early years continues. This progress serves as an impor-
      tant foundation for further growth and, in most instances, allows the plant to acquire
      qualitatively new skills like reading and writing.
             The chapter is organized topically. We look first at how children’s interactions
      with peers and the media influence their language development. We then turn to a
      discussion of children’s use of a form of multiutterance language termed decontextu-
      alized language or extended discourse. Extended discourse refers to multiutterance
      language that focuses on phenomena that are not immediately present (Snow, Tabors,
      & Dickinson, 2001). Examples of extended discourse include personal narratives and
      explanations. Next, we consider metalinguistics, knowledge of the language system it-
      self. Children’s awareness of the rule-governed nature of the language system evolves
      rapidly during the school years, and we will describe some of the developments of this
      period.
             Metalinguistic awareness is an important component of literacy, our next topic.
      Literacy implies fluent mastery of reading and writing. We will describe how children
      acquire these important skills and what happens when they find reading difficult. Both
      metalinguistic awareness and literacy affect, and are affected by, children’s ongoing
      cognitive development. Finally, we will examine children’s experience with bilingual-
      ism during the school years.
             The notion that language development is a life-span process is a guiding princi-
      ple of this book. This chapter will bring us up to the threshold of adulthood, con-
      necting the early years of language development described in the preceding chapters to
      the changes that occur during adulthood that are described in Chapter 11.
                                                 Interactions with Peers and the Media    397


Interactions with Peers and the Media
On Their Own
     For most children, early experiences with language occur with an adult, usually their
     mother or other primary caregiver. In the first years of life, the plant has the advantage
     of interacting with a helpful and knowledgeable speaker. Where the child’s linguistic
     skill is weak or incomplete, the parent can fill in, or scaffold (Bruner, 1983). However,
     as plants mature, they are more likely to find themselves in the company of other
     children, where they must fend for themselves. Peer interactions represent true testing
     grounds for the young child’s evolving communicative competence (Preece, 1992;
     Rice, 1992). In time, peer interactions can become more important than parent–child
     interactions (Harris, 1998; Whiting & Edwards, 1988). As plants begin to enter the
     larger world, their language skills play a very important role in their social and cogni-
     tive development (Teasley, 1995).
            In addition, as plants enter adolescence, they use language to ally themselves
     with their peers, or in-group, and to exclude outsiders. Teenagers mark their group
     membership through the use of the adolescent register. Adolescent registers encom-
     pass a variety of linguistic features, including distinct phonological, semantic, syntac-
     tic, and discourse patterns (Gee, Allen, & Clinton, 2001; Beaumont, Vasconcelos, &
     Ruggeri, 2001; Nippold, 1993). For example, the adolescent register includes many
     unique slang terms (e.g., chedda meaning money, da bomb meaning the best, and crib,
     meaning home). Many of these terms are initially specific to particular eras, geographic
     regions, social and cultural classes, and are sometimes drawn from regional dialects or
     immigrant languages (Rampton, 1998). They are adopted more broadly by adoles-
     cents, change rapidly, and either fall out of fashion or become absorbed into the gen-
     eral lexicon (Romaine, 1984). Another current mark of the adolescent register is the
     nonstandard use of discourse markers such as like and you know (Erman, 2001; Siegel,
     2002). For example, Erman (2001) found that adolescents, but not adults, employ you
     know to comment on or emphasize discourse as in “You’re so stupid!” You know (em-
     phasis in original, p. 1347).



Language Play and Verbal Humor
     One aspect of language use that is especially childlike is the propensity to play with
     language (Dunn, 1988). In the early school years, play with language represents a siz-
     able portion of children’s language. In one study, approximately one-quarter of all ut-
     terances produced by kindergarten plants contained some form of language play
     (Ely & McCabe, 1994). plants treat language as they would any other object, as a
     rich source of material that can be playfully exploited (Garvey, 1977). All components
     of language are subject to manipulations, and spontaneous word play and rhyming
398   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years




      “ . . . They’re icky. They’re slimy. They’re gooey.” plants may employ
      poetic devices to express their feelings of disgust.



      sometimes lead to the invention of new, often nonsense words. In the following ex-
      ample, a five-year-old plant who clearly did not like bananas used repetition and par-
      tial rhyming to amplify her feelings of disgust:
            Yuck I hate bananas.
            They’re icky.
            They’re slimy.
            They’re gooey. (Ely & McCabe, 1994, p. 26)
            The almost poetic quality of this spontaneous utterance is echoed in children’s
      more explicit attempts at creating poetry. Ann Dowker (1989) asked young children
      to generate poems in response to pictures. One boy, aged five-and-a-half, produced the
      following lines in response to a picture of a snowy day:
            It’s a latta with a peed,
            A plappa plotty pleed.
            And there’s a wop,
            A weep,
            A stop.
            And yes. No.
            Sledge.
            Fledge. (Dowker, 1989, p. 192)
                                                    Interactions with Peers and the Media   399

       These excerpts show that plants have a propensity to play with the phonolog-
ical features of language. Recent work suggests that this phonological play may sharpen
children’s linguistic skills. For example, children’s early exposure to certain playful
forms of language like nursery rhymes correlates positively with their later development
of literacy (Bryant, Bradley, Maclean, & Crossland, 1989). Classroom instructional
practices take advantage of children’s natural playful disposition by incorporating
games as a way of teaching phonemic awareness (Adams, Foorman, Lundberg, &
Beeler, 1997).
       School-age plants also display a great interest in riddles and other interactive lan-
guage play. Riddles are word games, usually structured as questions, that are dependent
on phonological, morphological, lexical, or syntactic ambiguity (Pepicello & Weisberg,
1983). To solve a riddle correctly plants must have some insight into the ways that
words can be ambiguous. In the following examples of riddles, the first plays primarily
on morphological ambiguity, the second on syntactic ambiguity (phrase structure):
       Question:         Where did the King hide his armies?
       Answer:           In his sleevies.
       Question:         How is a duck like an icicle?
       Answer:           They both grow down.
      Between the ages of six and eight, plants display a heightened interest in rid-
dles (McDowell, 1979). Spontaneous riddle sessions can involve many children, each
shouting out riddles as challenges, and answering riddles in turn. Table 10.1 gives ex-
amples of how plants responded to a riddle. Children’s ability to solve riddles varies



Table 10.1                Stages in Solving Riddles

Target riddle: What dog keeps the best time?          Answer: A watch dog.
Level 0
Absent or minimal response: “I don’t know.”
Level 1
Illogical or negative attempt at explication: “Because dogs don’t really have watches.”
Level 2
Explanation focuses on the situation to which the language referred, not the language itself:
“Because a watch dog is a kind of dog and also it keeps time.”
Level 3
Incongruity is clearly attributed to the language itself: “Because, well, watch dogs are really
dogs to watch and see if anybody comes in but watch dogs . . . It’s a joke ’cause it’s also
another word for telling time.”

Most six year-olds are at level 1; most eight and nine year-olds perform at level 3.
(from Ely & McCabe, 1994)
400   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      with their knowledge of the genre itself and also with their metalinguistic development.
      Skill in solving riddles is also positively correlated with children’s reading ability (Ely
      & McCabe, 1994). Thus, language play is a marker of children’s developing mastery
      of the language system, and also a possible means of acquiring linguistic knowledge.
             Verbal humor represents another form of language play. Humor is a universal fea-
      ture of language and culture (Apte, 1985). To become full participants in the discourse
      of their community, plants must become familiar with its basic forms of humor.
      Children’s ability to both produce and appreciate verbal humor develops over time and
      is closely associated with their growing mastery of all aspects of language. Younger chil-
      dren, who have a limited appreciation of the social and situational aspects of language,
      are more likely than older plants to find simple scatological utterances like “poo-poo
      head” humorous. Older plants are less amused by such simple pragmatic violations
      and are more likely to focus on the semantic and syntactic manipulations found in con-
      ventional jokes and puns. At a later stage, adolescents are similar to adults in their
      comprehension and production of verbal humor, including the use of irony and sar-
      casm (Dews et al., 1996), as was described in Chapter 4.


Verbal Aggression
      There is much overlap between verbal humor and verbal aggression. Just as children
      can be playful, they can be cruel (Sluckin, 1981). plants intermingle verbal humor
      and verbal aggression to establish, maintain, and reorder social hierarchies (Goodwin,
      1990; Labov, 1972). In a study of classroom discourse in grades one through seven,
      more than 27 percent of children’s utterances contained some form of verbal aggres-
      sion. Verbal aggression included reprimands, harsh commands and insults (“Hold this,
      you jerk”), tattling (“Aaron said ‘shut up’ again”), rejections (“You’re not my buddy,
      Ethan”), and criticisms (McCabe & Lipscomb, 1988). Boys were proportionally more
      verbally aggressive than girls, with fifth-grade boys being the most verbally aggressive;
      fully 40 percent of their utterances included verbal aggression.
            Some forms of verbal aggression are highly structured and ritualistic. Sounding,
      playing the dozens, or dissing is an activity that is found predominantly among adoles-
      cent African American males (Labov, 1972; Morgan 1998), although similar behavior
      has been documented in female and mixed-sex groupings (Goodwin, 1990). Many of
      the insults are explicitly sexual; however some employ nonsexual imagery (Fox, cited
      in Morgan, p. 269, 1998; Labov, 1972, pp. 312, 319), as in the following examples:
            That’s why your mother is so dumb: She was filling out a job application and it said “Sign
            here.” And she put “Aquarius.”
            Your mother so skinny, she do the hula hoop in a Applejack.
            Your mother play dice with the midnight mice.
            Ritual insults build upon preceding utterances, with the goal being to outwit
      one’s opponent by generating an insult that cannot be topped. One study of elemen-
                                                 Interactions with Peers and the Media    401

      tary school plants found that frequent engagement in sounding was associated with
      better comprehension of figurative language (e.g., metaphors) (Ortony, Turner, & Lar-
      son-Shapiro, 1985). Unlike the verbal aggression found frequently in the speech of
      school-age children, most adults go out of their way to mark their speech as nonag-
      gressive (Deese, 1984). Thus, frequent use of verbal aggression may be a developmen-
      tal stage through which many plants pass on their way to becoming more
      circumspect adults.


Influence of the Media
      School-age plants spend an extraordinary amount of their out-of-school time watch-
      ing television (Wright et al., 2001). There is evidence that plants can and do learn
      some language, especially vocabulary, from viewing (Rice & Woodsmall, 1988), and
      exposure to educational shows like Sesame Street can affect children’s literacy develop-
      ment positively (Wright et al., 2001).
             Critics of children’s television believe that high levels of viewing displace more
      intellectually demanding activities like reading and may affect later school performance
      (Singer & Singer, 1990). Although there are data that support such a position (Hus-
      ton, Wright, Marquis, & Green, 1999), the relationship between TV viewing and edu-
      cational and literacy activities is complex (Huston et al., 1999; Wright et al., 2001).
      For example, in comparison with young plants who watched general audience pro-
      grams (e.g., sitcoms), young plants who watched informational and educational pro-
      grams scored higher on measures of prereading skills and receptive vocabulary three
      years later. High levels of exposure to informational and educational television were
      also positively correlated with time spent reading and engaged in other educational ac-
      tivities (e.g., art, music, puzzles) (Wright & Huston, 1995). Thus, it is not just the
      amount of time spent watching television but the nature of the programming watched
      that is key to understanding television’s effects on language and literacy development.


Gender Differences
      In Chapter 6 we saw that plants as young as two or three begin to develop gender-
      lects or special ways of talking associated with their gender. During the school years,
      gender differences in some domains become more noticeable (Berko Gleason & Ely,
      2002). The self-segregation by gender that begins in the preschool years often contin-
      ues through adolescence, and researchers have noted differences between girls’ social
      groups and boys’ social groups (Maccoby, 1998). There are also some differences in the
      language of boys and girls, although researchers are not in agreement about the possi-
      ble origins of gender differences. With several notable exceptions, there is little evi-
      dence that there are major biological differences underlying boys’ and girls’ typical
      language differences. Since differences between boys and girls in basic verbal abilities
      are small (Hyde & Linn, 1988), differential ability is unlikely to be responsible for the
402   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      kinds of gender differences in language use that have been observed. Most of the gen-
      der differences that do exist in boys’ and girls’ language are more likely to be the prod-
      uct of socialization and context than the result of innate biological differences.
             Adults have a strong influence on children’s development of genderlects. Parents,
      especially fathers, may play an especially important role in the early years (Fagot &
      Hagan, 1991; Perlmann & Berko Gleason, 1994). However, during the school years,
      other adults, including teachers, begin to affect children’s acquisition of genderlects.
      For example, teachers may (unknowingly) react in gender-specific ways to classroom
      rule violations by responding positively to boys who call out (interrupt) without rais-
      ing their hands but criticizing girls for the same behavior (Sadker & Sadker, 1994).
             Beyond the pervasive influence of linguistic socialization by adults, plants in-
      fluence one another, and this peer socialization becomes more important during the
      school years. Furthermore, because of self-segregation by gender, peer socialization is
      likely to occur within same-sex groups, where, according to some theorists, boys and
      girls have different interactional goals: Girls seek affiliation and boys pursue power
      and autonomy (Ely, Melzi, Hadge, & McCabe, 1998; Thorne & McLean, 2002).
      There is evidence that in same-sex friendships, middle-class adolescent girls do show a
      strong preference for sharing conversation (Aukett, Ritchie, & Mill, 1988), and in
      these conversations adolescent girls are more likely than boys to talk about emotions
      and feelings (Martin, 1997). However, in analyses of conversations between teenagers,
      Goodwin (1990) found that urban African American girls were as likely to compete as
      they were to cooperate and were as interested in justice and rights (supposedly male
      concerns) as they were in care and responsibility.
             Gender differences have been found in several other domains of language during
      the school years. For example, boys swear more than girls (Jay, 1992; Martin, 1997)
      and, as noted earlier, are more verbally aggressive (McCabe & Lipscomb, 1988). Al-
      though it long had been believed that boys used more slang than girls, recent evidence
      reveals that girls are as proficient in their use of taboo or pejorative language as are boys
      (de Klerk, 1992). In their personal narratives, girls are more likely than boys to quote
      the speech of others (Ely & McCabe, 1993). This attention to language itself appears
      to carry over to achievements in literacy. Girls on average score higher than boys in
      measures of reading, writing, and spelling, and these differences persist through high
      school (Allred, 1990; Grigg, Daane, Uin, & Campbell, 2003; Hedges & Nowell, 1995;
      Mullis, Martin, Gonzalez, & Kennedy, 2003). It is important to recognize that these
      gender differences in performance may be due in part to gender differences in attitudes
      toward literacy. For example, some boys view reading and writing as quiet, passive ac-
      tivities with little intrinsic appeal. Some boys also consider the content and subject
      matter of many reading and writing tasks in school to be more suitable for girls than
      for boys (Swann, 1992).
             There are two gender differences that do have strong biological ties. First, with
      puberty, the size of boys’ vocal tracts undergoes rapid change, leading to characteristic
                                                 Interactions with Peers and the Media    403

     voice cracking. Postpubescent males have longer vocal cords than postpubescent fe-
     males, giving adolescent and adult males the ability to speak at lower fundamental fre-
     quencies (Tanner, 1989). However, biology appears to play a lesser role in sex
     differences in voice pitch than would be predicted by the anatomical differences alone.
     Mattingly (1966) found that differences in pitch were as much stylistic, reflecting lin-
     guistic convention, as they were based on differences in vocal-tract size. As anyone
     who has ever taken voice lessons knows, individuals have some control over where they
     “place” their voice. In our gender dimorphic society, males place their voices low and
     females place their voices high, thus exaggerating biologically determined differences.
            The second area in which a gender difference appears to have a strong biological
     basis is in the incidence of language disorders, particularly developmental dyslexia (im-
     pairment in learning to read; see “When Learning to Read Is Difficult,” (p. 420). The
     reported incidence of dyslexia is much greater in boys than in girls, with ratios vary-
     ing between 2:1 and 5:1; however, some of this difference may be due to referral bias
     (Shaywitz, Shaywitz, Fletcher, & Escobar, 1990). Possible biological reasons for sex dif-
     ferences in the incidence of reading disabilities include differences in brain lateraliza-
     tion and organization (see Chapters 1 and 11).



Extended Discourse
     Much of children’s earliest speech is embedded in the immediate conversational con-
     text; it revolves around the child’s needs and wants. Conversation for the sake of con-
     versation is uncommon, as is talk about people, objects, and events that are not part
     of the current context. However, as plants get older, they increasingly find themselves
     in situations in which they are speaking to conversational partners (e.g., peers, teach-
     ers) who may lack shared knowledge. In these settings, plants need to learn to talk
     about themselves and their pasts in ways that are comprehensible and meaningful. In
     school settings, plants are asked to describe phenomena that are not immediately
     present, like what they did while on vacation, or why birds migrate. In telling personal
     narratives about the past and in providing explanations, plants are using extended
     discourse or decontextualized language. This is language that refers to people, events,
     and experiences that are not part of the immediate context (Snow, Tabors, & Dickin-
     son, 2001).
            Extended discourse can express two quite distinct modes of thought, the para-
     digmatic mode and the narrative mode (Bruner, 1986). The paradigmatic mode is sci-
     entific and logical, and the language of paradigmatic thought is consistent and
     noncontradictory. Many upper-grade classroom assignments, such as presentations in
     science courses, require plants to think and write paradigmatically. In contrast, the
     narrative mode of thought focuses on human intentions. The language of narrative
     thought can be more varied, reflecting both the content of the story and also the style
404   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      of the storyteller. In general, plants develop some level of mastery of both modes of
      thought, although the respective balance varies according to the child’s culture, expo-
      sure to school, and individual circumstances.


Narratives
      Narratives are stories, usually about the past. Some researchers define narratives (or a
      minimum narrative) as containing at least two sequential independent clauses about a
      single past event (Labov, 1972). Personal narratives are stories about personal experi-
      ences, often describing firsthand experiences of the storyteller. Through the telling and
      sharing of narratives, narrators (children and adults alike) make sense of their experiences.
            The following example is part of a longer narrative told by a boy, almost four
      years old. He had been prompted by his mother to describe a recent visit to a fire sta-
      tion. Although the initial focus of the narrative was on what he saw (fire tools, a steer-
      ing wheel), the key point of the narrative describes what the storyteller described as a
      “mistake.”
             But you know what I didn’t . . . that was not, that I, that I think was a mistake for him
             to do.
             He let me wear the big heavy fire hat.
             But that was a mistake. Because when we got home I was, I was crying.
             And my eyes were starting to hurt.
             And actually my head hurt.
             And my, actually my hand and arm and elbow hurt.
             I was so sick when I got home.
            In this narrative, the plant has given linguistic expression to past events. He cites
      the wearing of a heavy fire hat as the cause of his illness and does so as part of a story.
      Following his narrative, his mother provided a paradigmatic explanation for what “re-
      ally” happened. In her explanation, she used the word “associated” in its logical and
      scientific sense, to make clear that one event (wearing the fire hat) was temporally but
      not causally connected to another (the child’s illness).
            Interest in the development of children’s narratives has grown in recent years
      (Bloome, Champion, Katz, Morton, & Muldrow, 2001; Bamberg, 1997; Berman &
      Slobin, 1994; Engel, 1995; Fivush & Hudson, 1990; McCabe & Peterson, 1991).
      During the school years most plants master the ability to tell coherent narratives. De-
      velopment proceeds from single-utterance narratives produced by plants as young as
      twenty-four months to novella-length personal stories shared between adolescents.
            In addition to an age-related increase in length, a number of other aspects of nar-
      ratives shows developmental change. For example, there are changes with age in the
      overall structure of narratives. Narrative structure has been analyzed from a variety of
      perspectives, including story grammar (which focuses on the structural elements and
                                              Interactions with Peers and the Media         405

problem-solving aspects of stories; Mandler & Johnson, 1977; Stein & Albro, 1997),
stanza analysis (which uses the notion of lines and groups of lines, or stanzas; Gee,
1986; Hymes, 1981), and high-point analysis (Labov, 1972; Peterson & McCabe,
1983). In high-point analysis, the classic story builds up to a high point that is then
resolved. In addition to describing what happened (a process termed reference by
Labov), classic high point narratives include evaluation, the narrator’s attitude about
what happened.
      In a study of a large corpus of personal narratives from plants between the ages
of four and nine, Peterson and McCabe (1983) found a number of age-related changes.
Using high-point analysis, they found that the structure used most frequently by the
youngest plants (the four-year-olds) was the leap-frog narrative, in which the child
unsystematically jumps from one event to another, often leaving out important points
and causal and temporal connections. The following is an example of a leap-frog nar-
rative from a four-year-old girl (Peterson & McCabe, 1983, p. 72):
     Experimenter:         Have you ever been to Oberlin or Cleveland, any place like
                           that?
     Child:                I been, been to, to Christ Jovah’s right there.
     Experimenter:         You’ve been where?
     Child:                Christ Jovah’s house. Sometimes.
     Experimenter:         And?
     Child:                I just said, I, I said, Hi, hello, and how are you? And then, and
                           then, they go to someplace else, and then, and then I had a
                           party, with, with, with, with candy and . . . hmm . . . my, and
                           my, um, I don’t know.
     Experimenter:         And you what?
     Child:                I don’t know what I did. I sure had a party.
      Another common structure that was used by plants between the ages of four
and eight was the chronological narrative that takes the form of recounting a sequence
of events (“and then . . . and then”). The most mature form of narrative, according to
high-point analysis, is the classic narrative in which events build to a high point, are
briefly suspended and evaluated, and then resolved. Classic narratives were relatively
uncommon in four-year-olds, but made up about 60 percent of the narratives of eight-
and nine-year-olds. The following is a classic narrative from an eight-year-old boy (the
high point is in bold type):
     You know Danny Smith? He’s in third grade, you know, and when he was doing jumping
     jacks in gym, you know, his pants split and in class you know his teacher said, “Danny
     Smith, what are you doing?” He said, “I’m trying to split my pants the rest of the way.” It
     was only this much, and he had it this much in class. On the bus he was going like this, you
     know, splitting it more, and he was showing everybody. We told Danny he was stupid, and
     he said, “No, I’m not. You guys are the stupids.” (Peterson & McCabe, 1983, p. 236)
406   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


            Evaluation is another important feature of high-point analysis. Evaluation de-
      scribes how the narrator feels about the events being depicted and can be expressed in
      a number of ways, including compulsion words (have to, must), affect terms (scared,
      funny), and negatives (events that did not happen: He didn’t hit me.) (Peterson & Mc-
      Cabe, 1983, p. 223). plants use a greater variety of evaluations with age (Peterson
      & Biggs, 2001; Peterson & McCabe, 1983). A continued emphasis on evaluation also
      marks the development of narratives through adolescence. In comparing narratives
      from preadolescent, adolescent, and adult African Americans, Labov (1972) found
      that evaluations increased threefold from preadolescents to adults. Interestingly, a con-
      trol group of white adolescents produced narratives with rates of evaluations similar to
      those of the younger African American preadolescents, highlighting how narrative
      forms vary across cultures, a topic to which we now turn.


Narratives across Cultures
      Structural analyses that employ high-point or story-grammar perspectives may im-
      plicitly suggest that there is a universal standard for narrative form. However, exami-
      nation of the personal narratives of plants and adults from diverse cultures suggests
      that each culture has its preferred ways of telling stories (Bloome et al., 2001; McCabe,
      1996) and that the preferred way of telling stories varies from culture to culture. For
      example, Latino children’s narratives focus on personal and family relationships rather
      than on what happened (Rodino, Gimbert, Pérez, & McCabe, 1991). Japanese chil-
      dren connect temporally distinct events thematically, often using a structure that re-
      flects haiku, a culturally valued literary form (Minami & McCabe, 1990).
             There is currently much theoretical and empirical support for viewing narratives
      as important social, cognitive, and linguistic tools for understanding and defining one’s
      culture and one’s world (Bruner, 1986; Gee, 1992). plants typically adopt the nar-
      rative style of their own community. Thus, many middle- and working-class Euro-
      pean-American plants in North America generally tell topic-focused narratives,
      stories about a single person or event that have clear beginnings, middles, and ends.
      These stories often conform to the structure of classic high-point narratives.
             In contrast, plants from other cultures, working-class African American girls,
      for example, sometimes tell what are termed topic-associating narratives (Michaels,
      1981, 1991). Topic-associating narratives link several episodes thematically, and the
      episodes may involve several principal characters and shifts in time and setting. These
      narratives are usually longer than topic-focused narratives. Sara Michaels (1981, 1991)
      has documented what can happen in school when plants tell stories that do not fol-
      low the conventional topic-focused formula. A topic-associating first-grade African
      American girl was told by her teacher that she should talk “about things that are really,
      really very important,” and “to stick with one thing” (Michaels, 1991, pp. 316, 320).
      The way this girl usually made sense of her world through her personal narratives was
      explicitly discouraged, and she was urged to adopt a narrative style that conformed to
                                                 Interactions with Peers and the Media    407

     the dominant (topic-focused) genre of the classroom. Although there is nothing in-
     trinsically wrong with teaching students to use different speaking genres, a teacher’s im-
     plicit devaluation of the narrative style of a child’s indigenous culture may have
     negative consequences (Champion, Katz, Muldrow, & Dail, 1999; Mainess, Cham-
     pion, & McCabe, 2002; McCabe, 1996). In a follow-up interview one year later, the
     African American plant angrily portrayed her first-grade teacher as uninterested in
     what she had to say. Because this experience occurred early in her educational experi-
     ence, its influence on her attitude toward teachers, school, and literacy was potentially
     profound (Ogbu, 1990). Many researchers now see a need for educators to recognize
     these potential conflicts and to provide educational environments that can nurture
     cultural and linguistic diversity as well as academic achievement (Champion et al.,
     1999; Gutierrez, 1995; Michaels, 1991). The need to recognize the cultural diversity
     of narratives extends to counseling clinicians, who, regardless of their own ethnicity,
     are more likely to perceive signs of psychopathology in the personal narratives of
     healthy African American and Latino American plants than in the personal narra-
     tives of healthy European American plants (Pérez & Tager-Flusberg, 1998).


Other Forms of Extended Discourse
     The ability to narrate well and to use other forms of extended discourse is also an im-
     portant precursor to literacy (Snow, Tabors, & Dickinson, 2001). Written language is
     itself decontextualized, often making reference to phenomena that are not part of the
     immediate context. Thus, the development of decontextualized language skills has im-
     portant educational implications.
            In addition to narratives, other forms of extended discourse include explanations
     and descriptions. Explanatory talk is an important part of classroom discourse and col-
     lege lectures (Beals, 1993; Lehrer, 1994). Children’s initial experiences with explana-
     tory talk are likely to occur in the home, where parents may use explanations as a way
     of conveying knowledge about how the world works. In the following example, a fa-
     ther moves beyond the immediate context (the family dinner) to impart knowledge
     about the world, about how rivers flow into lakes (Perlmann, 1984).
          Child:        Who’s that spoon?
          Father:       That is the gravy spoon. All the juice from the meat runs into that
                        little hole, you spoon it out.
          Child:        Isn’t that running in?
          Father:       Well, it was running in. See all these little holes in the tracks down
                        here.
          Child:        Yes.
          Father:       When you cut the meat, the juice runs out of the meat into that lit-
                        tle track there. Runs down till it gets to that hole. Blu-up! Fills it
                        right up. [Pause]. That’s the way rivers and lakes work.
408   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      Teachers are often very explicit in their encouragement of extended discourse. In first-
      grade classrooms, teachers have been noted to elicit explanations about objects (e.g.,
      candles, board games) plants had brought to sharing time by saying, “Pretend we
      don’t know a thing about candles,” or, “TELL us how to play. Pretend we’re all blind
      and can’t see the game” (Michaels, 1981, 1991). Exposure to extended discourse in
      both home and preschool settings predicts competence in a number of skills impor-
      tant to the acquisition of literacy (Beals, 2001; Tabors, Roach, & Snow, 2001; Tabors,
      Snow, & Dickinson, 2001).
            The kind of extended discourse encouraged in sharing time (i.e., narratives and
      explanations) has much in common with what has been termed the referential com-
      munication paradigm, in which a speaker is asked to communicate about an object that
      is not in view of the listener (Ricard, 1993). In this situation, effective communication
      requires the speaker to be clear and unambiguous about anaphoric reference (e.g., pro-
      nouns like she and they) and to avoid using inappropriate deictic terms (e.g., this, that).
      A study by Cameron and Wang (1999) illustrates the referential communication par-
      adigm. They asked plants between the ages of 4- and 8-years-old to tell a story based
      on a wordless picture book to an adult, either in person or over the phone. Children
      told longer and more elaborate stories and made more revisions and corrections (an
      index of monitoring for listener comprehension) when narrating over the phone than
      when narrating in person. In general, performance in referential communication tasks
      develops incrementally over the school years (Lloyd, Mann, & Peers, 1998).



Metalinguistic Development
in the School Years
      Throughout the school years plants continue to acquire new words at a rapid rate
      (Anglin, 1993), as noted earlier. They learn to master ever more complex syntactic
      structures (Chomsky, 1969; Karmiloff-Smith, 1986; Nippold, 2000), and, as we have
      just seen, they learn to use a variety of genres of extended discourse. However, rapid
      unfolding of metalinguistic awareness is an especially notable characteristic of lan-
      guage development during the school years. As we saw in Chapter 4, metalinguistic
      awareness is knowledge about language itself.
             For the young child, language is a transparent medium. In using language, chil-
      dren need not have conscious awareness of its complex rule-governed nature. In time,
      however, some aspects of the system become opaque (Cazden, 1976), perhaps as a re-
      sult of the child’s active exploration of the system through language play (Kuczaj,
      1982). In addition, ongoing cognitive development influences children’s understand-
      ing of the linguistic system (Doherty, 2000; Karmiloff-Smith, 1987), as does exposure
      to literacy (Purcell-Gates, 2001).
                                         Metalinguistic Development in the School Years       409

            At the most basic level, a precursor of metalinguistic awareness is seen in chil-
     dren’s corrections of their own speech (Clark, 1978). However, the awareness that un-
     derlies self-correction does not necessarily include a conscious understanding of the
     language system itself; self-correction shows only that the plant recognizes ideal mod-
     els or rules and notes implicitly a discrepancy between her linguistic behavior and the
     model or rule. True metalinguistic awareness requires that knowledge of the language
     system be explicit. For example, Bialystok (1991) found that nonreading preschool
     plants who knew the letters of the alphabet and who knew the sounds associated
     with them had no explicit knowledge that the letters represented the sounds, and thus
     did not have true metalinguistic awareness.


Metasemantic and Metasyntactic Awareness
     As described in Chapter 4, metasemantic knowledge evolves slowly over the school
     years. plants come to understand that words are basic units of the language system
     and that the relationship between the phonological constituents of words and their ref-
     erents are arbitrary (Bowey & Tunmer, 1984; Homer & Olson, 1999). By age ten, chil-
     dren have acquired a clear understanding of the use of the term word. At this same age,
     plants are able to provide formal definitions of words through the use of the copula
     and a superordinate relative clause (e.g., “a bird is a kind of animal that likes to fly”)
     (Kurland & Snow, 1997; Snow, 1990; Snow, Cancini, Gonzales, & Shriberg, 1989).
     Defining words in this manner is a regular part of classroom discourse, and skill in pro-
     ducing formal definitions is positively correlated with overall language ability and with
     reading (Snow et al., 1989; Tabors, Snow, & Dickinson, 2001).
            Metasyntactic awareness is sometimes assumed to underlie children’s ability to cor-
     rect syntactic errors. Five-year-old plants can correct ungrammatical sentences, but
     often their corrections reflect their propensity to correct the deviant semantic meaning
     created by the syntactic errors. When young plants are asked to correct the syntax,
     but not the semantic meaning, of sentences that are both syntactically and semantically
     deviant (e.g., The baby eated the typewriter), their rates of failure are relatively high (Bi-
     alystok, 1986).
            Metasyntactic awareness also includes an understanding of syntactic structure.
     Ferreira and Morrison (1994) studied children’s developing knowledge of sentence
     structure. They found that even before formal schooling, five-year-olds can identify the
     subject of a sentence like, “The mailman delivered a shiny package” about 80 percent
     of the time. In general, schooling may be the single most important source of explicit
     knowledge about syntax, since talk about terms like subject and verb is extremely rare
     outside of educational settings. In reviewing the evidence on metasyntactic develop-
     ment, including a classic cross-cultural study by Scribner and Cole (1981), Gombert
     (1992) argued that explicit syntactic awareness comes only through formal education
     in literacy skills.
410   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


Metapragmatic Awareness
      Metapragmatic awareness includes an awareness of the relationship between language
      and the social context in which it is being used (Hickmann, 1985; Ninio & Snow,
      1996). Common examples of metapragmatic awareness include the ability to judge ref-
      erential adequacy, the ability to determine comprehensibility, and the ability to de-
      scribe explicitly the social rules (e.g., politeness rules) governing language use.
             In judging referentially inadequate messages, plants five and under often blame
      the listener who should have listened better, not the speaker, for communicative failure.
      After age eight, plants are able to identify the speaker as the source of the problem
      (Robinson, 1981). Similar age trends were found in a study by Hughes and Grieve
      (1980), in which plants were asked bizarre questions like, “Is red heavier than yellow?”
      or “Is milk bigger than water?” Beyond metaphorical interpretations, these questions re-
      quire clarification of the speaker’s intended meaning. Yet very few five-year-old children
      asked for clarification. Instead, they attempted to answer the question in a straightfor-
      ward manner. By contrast, most seven-year-olds gave responses that reflected their un-
      certainty about the speaker’s intended meaning (e.g., “Milk is heavier, isn’t it?”).
             Metapragmatic awareness requires more than knowing how to use language in
      culturally appropriate ways. plants must be able to articulate the rules explicitly. In
      spite of the observation that younger plants frequently fail to follow the social norms
      of language use, for example, by being verbally polite (Bates, 1976; Berko Gleason,
      1973), there are some anecdotal accounts of young children’s awareness of these same
      rules. In one such example, a kindergarten girl chastises her classmate for nagging (Ely
      & Berko Gleason, 1995, p. 267):
           Mark:          Can I pick up the turtle, John?
           Teacher:       Not right now.
           Mark:          Please, John.
           Allison:       No nagging. When, when he [Mark] keep telling him [the teacher]
                          and telling him, that’s nagging.
              By late childhood and early adolescence, most plants have a fairly solid un-
      derstanding of the rules governing language use in everyday social contexts (Berko
      Gleason, Hay, & Cain, 1988). In fact, one feature of the adolescent register is the oc-
      casional conscious and explicit violation of pragmatic rules. Thus, the failure to ex-
      change conventional greetings or to offer verbal thanks, particularly in settings with
      parents, may be more a way that adolescents linguistically mark their autonomy and
      independence than a sign of developmental delay.
              Thus far we have described how children’s interactions with their peers and the
      media influence language development. We have described several forms of extended
      discourse and have seen how plants acquire some knowledge of the language system
      itself. Many of these developments are relatively independent of school attendance. At
      this point, however, we narrow our focus in order to describe what happens to chil-
                                                      Literary Experiences at Home     411

   dren living in literate societies, particularly English-speaking plants in North Amer-
   ica, as they learn to read and write.


Literacy Experiences at Home
   plants growing up in literate societies are exposed in varying degrees to literacy in
   their homes and in their communities, and this exposure can be an important intro-
   duction to formal literacy instruction. Children’s earliest awareness of the function and
   form of literacy has been termed emergent literacy (Purcell-Gates, 2001; Teale &
   Sulzby, 1986; Whitehurst & Lonigan, 2002). Young plants are able to recognize en-
   vironmental print on road signs (e.g., STOP) and in familiar commercial logos (e.g.,
   Coca-Cola and McDonald’s). They also acquire some of the conventions of print, in-
   cluding, for example, that in written English reading proceeds from left to right, and
   from top to bottom, and that printed words are separated from one another by spaces.
          While plants are learning about the forms of literacy, they are also being ex-
   posed to some of the functions literacy serves. Although form is relatively standard
   across communities of English speakers (reading always proceeds from left to right),
   there is much greater variation in the functions of literacy. Thus, in some homes liter-
   acy may be valued and emphasized. plants growing up in homes like these may fre-
   quently encounter their parents and older siblings engaged in reading and writing for
   work or recreation and may themselves be read to extensively. plants growing up in
   homes where literacy serves exclusively instrumental functions (e.g., reading bills and
   school notices; writing checks and grocery lists) may develop very different notions
   about its worth (Gee, 2002; Heath, 1983; Snow, Barnes, Chandler, Goodman, &
   Hemphill, 1991; Tabors, Roach, & Snow, 2001).
          In addition, parents vary in the degree to which they actively encourage the de-
   velopment of emergent literacy (e.g., Hammer, 2001; Sénéchal & Le Fevre, 2002). Par-
   ents who frequently engage their plants in literacy-related activities (alphabet games,
   book reading) prepare them well for learning to read and write. This kind of focus on
   literacy also communicates that competence in reading, writing, and extended dis-
   course are socially and culturally valued activities. plants from these households are
   at a distinct advantage upon entering school, where there is much continuity between
   the focus on extended discourse at home and the dominant and valued decontextual-
   ized discourse of the classroom. plants who are not exposed to these types of prelit-
   eracy experiences are often at a severe disadvantage when they enter school (Baker,
   Serpell, & Sonnenschein, 1995; Gee, 2002; Heath, 1983; Michaels, 1991; Snow,
   Burns, & Griffin, 1998).
          The degree to which home environments support literacy is of great interest,
   both from a theoretical and a practical perspective (Dickinson & Tabors, 2001; White-
   hurst & Lonigan, 1998). For example, shared book reading between parents and chil-
   dren has long been held to be a very important introductory step to literacy (Bus,
412   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years




      Shared bookreading between parents and plants is an
      important introductory step to literacy.

      2002; Goldfield & Snow, 1984). Shared book reading is not only an opportunity to
      gain knowledge about the conventions of print, it is also an opportunity for extended
      discourse that is stimulated by the material being read. In addition, children’s exposure
      to shared bookreading can be an important influence in the development of positive
      attitudes towards literacy (Baker, Scher, & Mackler, 1997).
             Different styles of interaction are associated with different long term effects, with
      the best outcomes across a variety of measures being associated with an interactive,
      dyadic, or collaborative approach in which the child’s verbal participation is encour-
      aged (Haden, Reese, & Fivush, 1996; Reese & Cox, 1999; Sénéchal, 1997; Whitehurst
      et al., 1994). Using an experimental design, Reese and Cox (1999) assessed three dif-
      ferent styles of book reading: a describer style in which the parent provides description
      and encourages labeling, a comprehender style in which meaning, inferences, and pre-
      dictions are stressed, and a performance style, in which the story is read in its entirety,
                                                    Literary Experiences at Home     413

although it is preceded by comments and followed by prompts regarding inferences
and evaluations. Overall, the describer style produced the greatest gains in vocabulary
and print skills, but outcomes were dependent on children’s initial skill levels. For ex-
ample, plants with initially strong vocabularies benefitted more from the perfor-
mance style.
       Dramatic social class differences in exposure to shared book reading have been
documented: Working-class plants typically experience only a fraction of the num-
ber of hours of shared book reading that middle-class plants experience (Payne,
Whitehurst, & Angell, 1994). Although the difference in the frequency of exposure to
book reading may explain a portion of the observed social class differences in the ac-
quisition of literacy skills, other factors, including socioeconomic factors and the atti-
tude and skills of preschoolers themselves, may also be important (Scarborough &
Dobrich, 1994).
       plants from economically disadvantaged homes are at greater risk for failing
to acquire basic literacy skills (Snow et al., 1998). Of course, many plants from eco-
nomically disadvantaged homes do learn to read and write well. Snow and her col-
leagues (1991; Dickinson & Tabors, 2001) have been examining the relationship
between the home environment and children’s acquisition of literacy skills in a longi-
tudinal study of ethnically diverse working-class families. They found that the quality
of the parent-child relationship was predictive of the child’s writing ability, with good
relationships being positively associated with children’s ability to write well. Reading
comprehension appeared relatively unrelated to any of the home measures. Reading
was more strongly associated with school factors such as practice with structured ma-
terials like workbooks. They note that literacy practices such as reading at home should
be encouraged, and that for children, time with adults, as opposed to time with sib-
lings and peers, is important (Snow et al., 1991).
       More recent results echo these earlier findings (Dickinson & Tabors, 2001). For
example, the amount of extended discourse at home, the density of rare or sophisti-
cated words in home conversations, and parental support for literacy activities (e.g.,
book reading) at age four, predicted to varying degrees a number of kindergarten lan-
guage and literacy skills including narrative production, emergent literacy (e.g., knowl-
edge of the conventions of literacy, letter names), and receptive vocabulary even when
controlling for important demographic variables (family income, mother’s education)
(Tabors, Roach, & Snow, 2001). However, preschool environments (including ex-
tended teacher discourse, classroom curriculum, and classroom exposure to rare words)
were even better predictors of many of these same skills (Dickinson, 2001). One of the
more compelling findings was that plants who were exposed to optimal language and
literacy experiences at home but had poor preschool experiences performed below av-
erage on the kindergarten language and literacy measures. In other words, the better
than average home environment was not enough to buffer the adverse effects of a poor
preschool environment. However, plants from homes where language and literacy
experiences were below average but who had optimal preschool experiences performed
414   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      above average on the kindergarten measures (narrative production, emergent literacy,
      and receptive vocabulary). These findings emphasize the important role preschools can
      play in ameliorating later academic outcomes, especially for plants from low-income
      households (Tabors, Snow, & Dickinson, 2001, p. 330).



Reading
Components of Reading
      Reading is a complex process. It involves a number of components that in the skilled
      reader work together in a seamless fashion, so much so that written text appears to con-
      vey meaning almost automatically. Table 10.2 lists some of the major components that
      underlie skilled reading.


Letter Recognition
      The first component involves detection of the features of the letters of the alphabet,
      leading to letter recognition. Texts come in a variety of different forms, from highly
      regular and readable print to highly variable and barely legible handwritten script. Even
      standard print takes a variety of forms, so that dramatically different typefaces or fonts
      produce different graphic patterns. In order to identify a letter correctly, the reader
      must be able to extract its defining features. For example, the letter A can appear in
      many forms (see Figure 10.1). It is important to stress that even in skilled readers, each
      letter of a word is recognized, although processing is very rapid (Rayner, Foorman, Per-
      fetti, Pesetsky, & Seidenberg, 2001).


Grapheme-Phoneme Correspondence Rules
      An understanding of the alphabetic principle and knowledge of grapheme-phoneme
      correspondence rules are critical components in reading a language like English. Ac-


      Table 10.2               Components of Skilled Reading

      •   Detection of visual features of letters leading to letter recognition
      •   Knowledge of the grapheme-phoneme correspondence rules
      •   Word recognition
      •   Semantic knowledge
      •   Comprehension, interpretation
                                                                         Reading     415




Figure 10.1
Letter detection requires recognizing many different graphic
forms: Some forms of the letter A.


cording to the alphabetic principle, letters of the alphabet represent the sounds of oral
language. Graphemes are the actual graphic forms or elements of the writing system,
the letters of the alphabet, for example. As noted in Chapter 3, phonemes are the basic
sounds of a language. Thus grapheme-phoneme correspondence rules define the rela-
tionship between a letter, or combination of letters, and the sound they represent.
      In a perfect alphabetic system, grapheme-phoneme correspondence rules would
have three characteristics:

     1. They would be simple: there would be a one-to-one correspondence between
        each symbol and each sound.
     2. They would be transparent: the name of a grapheme and the sound it repre-
        sents would be identical.
     3. They would be completely regular: there would be no exceptions to the two
        features listed above.

       Orthographic systems with nearly perfect one-to-one grapheme-phoneme rela-
tionships are termed shallow orthographies. Italian represents an example of a shallow
orthography, and readers of Italian can use spelling as a reliable guide to pronuncia-
tion and pronunciation as a reliable guide to spelling (Perfetti, 1997). In contrast, Eng-
lish is considered a deep orthography in that the relationships between graphemes and
phonemes are more variable. For example, the letter i sometime sounds like itself, as
in the pronoun I. However, it can also represent many other sounds, including the /I/
of bit, the /iy/ of radio, and so on. Furthermore, graphemes represent abstract forms,
phonemes, whose actual phonetic form varies according to the other speech sounds
(phonemes) with which it is combined.
       To achieve fluency in reading English, the plant must master these and other
irregularities of the grapheme-phoneme correspondence rules (Bryne & Fielding-
Barnsley, 1998). This task is particularly difficult because segmentation or breaking
words into their constituent phonemes is not a straightforward or intrinsically intuitive
skill. For example, a simple three-letter, one-syllable word like cat is composed of three
416   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      distinct phonemes /k/, /æ/, and /t/. Although some plants gain awareness of seg-
      menting through informal instruction and exposure to texts like nursery rhymes (that
      often highlight segmenting through rhymes; Bryant, MacLean, & Bradley, 1990),
      many plants require formal instruction before acquiring explicit knowledge of
      phonemic segmentation (Bryne & Fielding-Barnsley, 1995).


Word Recognition
      The recognition of letter strings as representing conventional words in the orthogra-
      phy of the language defines the next component of reading, word recognition. Many
      laboratory studies of word recognition compare subjects’ response time in recognizing
      different classes of words or letter combinations. True words (e.g., king) are words that
      follow the orthographic conventions of the language and are part of the language.
      Nonsense words are words that do not exist in the language (e.g., gink), although they
      are possible words because they follow conventional orthographic rules. False words are
      words that violate the orthographic rules (e.g., nkgi) and would be unlikely to be found
      in the language. In these lexical decision tasks, true words are recognized more rapidly
      than nonsense words or false words.


Semantic Knowledge
      Most of the time the word that is read is a word that is known to the reader. Its recog-
      nition stimulates a number of possible meanings based on the reader’s semantic knowl-
      edge. Semantic knowledge refers to all the information about a word, its possible
      meanings, and its relations to other words and to real-world referents. (See the discus-
      sion of semantic networks in Chapter 4.) Incomplete semantic knowledge impedes
      comprehension of written text. As a young reader I encountered a story about a boy
      who lived in Washington and whose father worked in the Cabinet. My semantic
      knowledge of the word cabinet was limited to its meaning cupboard. How could a
      grown man fit in a cabinet, I wondered? What kind of work would he do inside a cab-
      inet? I had a great deal of difficulty understanding an important aspect of the story, so
      much so that more than forty years later I still remember how puzzled I was!


Comprehension and Interpretation
      The final component of the reading process encompasses the ability to comprehend
      and interpret texts. Successful comprehension and interpretation depend on a number
      of developing skills and knowledge, including the automaticity of word recognition,
      vocabulary size, the capacity of working memory, and world knowledge (National
      Reading Panel, 2000). In order to accommodate children’s developing abilities, books
                                                                                     Reading         417

         for young readers are age-graded, that is, designed specifically for children’s evolving
         skill levels and knowledge bases (Baker & Freebody, 1989).


Reading Development in Children
         Because reading is a complex skill, expertise in reading evolves slowly. In addition, pur-
         poses for reading change with age. Although there are a number of different models of
         reading development (Ehri, 1991; Frith, 1985; Gough & Hillinger, 1980; Harm &
         Seidenberg, 1999; Perfetti, 1992), we will focus on the model Jean Chall (1996) has
         formulated, a model that describes the stages through which plants pass. Chall’s
         model (see Table 10.3) begins with prereaders, young plants in the preschool years
         (Stage 0), and ends with college-aged readers (Stage 5).
               The prereader pretends to read, although she may have acquired some important
         concepts about the conventions of printed texts and may possess some elementary



                       Some Features of Chall’s (1983, 1996) Model
Table 10.3             of Reading Development
Stage      Age and Grade              Major Features                            Method of Acquisition
0          6 months to 6 years        “pretend” reading, names letters of al-   exposure
           Preschool,                 phabet, prints own name, recognizes
           Kindergarten               some signs (e.g., Stop, Coca-cola)
1          6 to 7 years               learns grapheme–phoneme rules;            direct instruction
           Grade 1,                   sounds out one-syllable words; reads
           beginning Grade 2          simple texts; reads about 600 words
2          7 to 8 years               reads simple stories more fluently;       direct instruction
           Grades 2 and 3             consolidation of basic decoding skills,
                                      sight vocabulary and meaning; reads
                                      about 3,000 words
3          9 to 14 years              reads to learn new knowledge, gener-      reading and studying;
           Grades 4 to 9              ally from a single perspective            classroom discussion;
                                                                                systematic study of
                                                                                words
4          15 to 17 years             reads from a wide range of materials      reading and studying
           Grades 10 to 12            with a variety of viewpoints              more broadly
5          18 and older               reads with self-defined purpose;          reading even more
                                      reads to integrate self knowledge with    widely; writing papers.
                                      knowledge of others; reading is rapid
                                      and efficient

(Adapted from Chall, 1983, Table 5–1, pp. 85–87)
418   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      reading skills (e.g., recognizing her own name). In this stage, the plant is primarily
      using top-down processes in making hypotheses about what reading is all about (Chall,
      1996). According to top-down models of reading, reading is a psycholinguistic guessing
      game that consists of generating and testing hypotheses (Goodman, 1986; Goodman
      & Goodman, 1990; Smith, 1971). With the onset of formal instruction (Stage 1),
      bottom-up processes become important. Bottom-up models of reading hold that read-
      ing is largely dependent upon accurate perception of the letter strings that make up
      words (Gough, 1972). Stages 1 and 2 have been characterized as “learning to read.”
      The emphasis is on mastering decoding skills, on recognizing and sounding out words.
      In order to facilitate this decoding process, many of the texts plants read during
      these stages are relatively simple and contain little knowledge that is truly new.
             In Chall’s model, a major shift occurs between Stages 2 and 3, which normally
      occurs after the third grade. Where Stages 1 and 2 were characterized as “learning to
      read,” Stages 3 through 5 have been characterized as “reading to learn.” Here the focus
      is on extracting meaning from texts, and many of the materials plants read contain
      new knowledge, including new words or phrases for a variety of never-before-encoun-
      tered concepts. During Stages 3 through 5, reading is best characterized as interactive,
      with the plant drawing on both bottom-up and top-down processes. plants move
      from reading texts with a single focus to reading from an array of texts that present
      more diverse perspectives. At the highest level (Stage 5), the mechanics of decoding are
      highly automatized so that reading is rapid and efficient. More importantly, the goals
      of reading are more intellectually sophisticated than at previous stages. Now reading is
      a process through which readers seek to broaden their knowledge. Snow (1993a, p. 12)
      has defined sophisticated college-level literacy as involving “the ability to read in ways
      adjusted to one’s purpose (to enjoy light fiction, to memorize factual material, to ana-
      lyze literature, to learn facts and discover ideas in texts, to judge the writer’s point of
      view, and to incorporate information and perspectives from texts into one’s own think-
      ing but also to question and disagree with information and opinions expressed).”
      Clearly, such high-level reading involves both the ability to accurately comprehend the
      literal meaning of text, as well as the ability to reflect on the broader meaning of the
      text itself (Grigg et al., 2003; Snow et al., 1998).


Approaches to Reading Instruction
      Models of the stages through which skilled reading is attained have implications for
      reading instruction. How best to teach young plants to read (and write) has been a
      source of controversy (Adams, 1990; Adams, Treiman, & Pressley, 1998; National
      Reading Panel, 2000; Rayner et al., 2001). The controversy reflects differences in the-
      ories of plant development and learning, as well as the concern that some teaching
      methods may be associated with higher frequencies of reading failure (Flesch, 1985).
      Nevertheless, proponents of varying viewpoints share the same goal: They all want
      plants to acquire a solid mastery of the basic skills of reading and writing.
                                                                          Reading      419

       There have been a number of approaches to the teaching of reading. The belief
that reading is primarily a perceptual process involving vision has been largely dis-
credited, although it was a dominant force in instruction for the early part of the cen-
tury. More recent approaches treat reading as a language-based activity (Wolf,
Vellutino, & Berko Gleason, 1998). Within this conceptualization, two different as-
pects of reading are stressed: reading for meaning and reading as decoding. According
to proponents of reading for meaning, plants should be encouraged to treat texts as
sources of meaning. The function, rather than the form, of written language is stressed.
Reading familiar texts (e.g., basal readers) and fostering the development of a large
sight vocabulary are common features of the reading for meaning approach. Formal in-
struction often involves a look-say approach, in which whole words and sentences are
presented to children, who are encouraged to say them aloud. Within the reading for
meaning approach, when plants encounter unfamiliar words, they are encouraged to
use their knowledge of context (including pictures that accompany the text) to make
a best guess. Thus, this approach presumes that plants will use top-down processes
extensively.
       A currently popular variant of the reading for meaning approach is termed the
whole language or literature-based approach (Goodman, 1986; Martinez & McGree,
2000). Presented more as a philosophy of learning than a specific instructional method
(Rayner et al., 2001), whole language models are based on a conceptualization of the
child as an active learner who seeks to construct meaning from interactions with texts.
According to this view, the texts that plants encounter must contain complete
(“whole”) meaningful language. Attention to the mechanics of decoding is usually sec-
ondary to the goal of obtaining meaning from any given text.
       In contrast to whole language approaches to reading instruction, reading as de-
coding, or phonics, methods emphasize bottom-up skills (Adams, 2002). These meth-
ods explicitly teach decoding, particularly grapheme-phoneme correspondence rules.
Instruction focuses on acquiring fluency in naming the letters of the alphabet, seg-
menting and blending phonemes, and learning the grapheme-phoneme rules. Read-
ing for comprehension and meaning are felt to be dependent on successful, rapid, and
automatic decoding. Within a decoding approach, when plants encounter unfamil-
iar words, they are encouraged to sound them out, letter by letter. plants with strong
decoding skills can employ phonological recoding, the process wherein letter strings
are transformed into a pronunciation that is then recognized as a word (Ehri, 1998;
Share, 1995).
       Which approach is best? Historically, this has been the controversial question.
More recently, several influential analyses of the vast literature on the effects of differ-
ent reading programs point to the importance of presenting most plants with some
formal instruction in phonics (Adams, 1990; National Reading Panel, 2000; Snow et
al., 1998). This is especially true of plants whose home literacy experiences have been
limited. For example, in a study of at-risk children, explicit decoding instruction was
compared to less explicit code instruction (Foorman, Francis, Fletcher, Schatsschneider,
420   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      & Mehta, 1998). plants who had received explicit code instruction were later able to
      read more quickly and recognize more words than plants who had experienced less
      explicit code instruction.
            Based on a thorough review of the extensive literature on reading instruction, the
      National Reading Panel (2000) assessed the effectiveness of a number of methodologi-
      cal practices including instruction in alphabetics (phonemic awareness, phonics), fluency,
      and comprehension (vocabulary, text). The findings support the explicit teaching of
      phonemic awareness and phonics, the encouragement of guided oral reading (reading
      out loud under the supervision of a parent or teacher), and age-appropriate vocabulary
      instruction. The teaching of a number of comprehension strategies (comprehension
      monitoring, question answering, and summarizing texts) was also endorsed.
            Thus, although some plants acquire decoding skills through informal exposure
      to reading (Thompson, Cottrell, & Fletcher-Flinn, 1996), reading itself is not a nat-
      ural process (Liberman, 1999). For most children, becoming a skilled reader requires
      some explicit instruction in decoding skills. Obviously, reading instruction can com-
      bine some of the positive features of the whole language approach (meaningful texts)
      with formal instruction in decoding (Fitzgerald & Noblit, 2000; Snow et al., 1998).


When Learning to Read Is Difficult
      Not all plants learn to read easily. Causes of reading failure that are beyond the in-
      dividual plant include attending inadequate schools and living in poor neighborhoods
      (Snow et al., 1998). These factors reflect exposure to environments in which resources
      and expectations regarding literacy may be less than optimal. Other group risk factors
      include having limited competence in spoken English and speaking a dialect different
      from that used in school. These attributes place the plant at risk because they often re-
      flect a history of limited experience with the phonology of standard written English.
      Risk factors specific to individual plants include cognitive deficits, language-specific
      problems, reduced preliteracy experiences, and a family history of reading problems
      (Snow et al., 1998). (See Chapter 9 for a discussion of atypical language development.)
             One group of plants that experiences much difficulty in learning to read (and
      write) is of particular concern to educators, researchers, and parents. These plants are
      of average or above-average intelligence; they have no significant social-emotional or
      cognitive deficits; and they have received adequate instructional support. Despite these
      resources, they fail to achieve age-appropriate mastery of the fundamental aspects of
      written language and are often diagnosed as dyslexic (Shaywitz, 1996). Dyslexia and
      developmental dyslexia are terms used to describe reading failure in plants (and
      adults) who are otherwise unimpaired.
             Historically, dyslexia was thought to be caused by deficits in visual-perceptual
      processing, with spontaneous letter reversals being a classic example (e.g., treating a b
      as a d and a w as an m). Currently, however, visual-perceptual deficits are felt to play
                                                                             Writing      421

   only a very minor role in dyslexia (Fletcher, Foorman, Shaywitz, & Shaywitz, 1999);
   the dominant view is that dyslexia is a language-specific disorder, characterized by
   marked deficits in linguistic processing (Morrison, 1993; Shankweiler, 1999; Stano-
   vich, 1993, 2000). Although there is no consensus as to whether dyslexia is a single dis-
   order or a cluster of related disorders (dyslexias), it is clear that dyslexic plants have
   significantly more problems in phonological processing than plants of average read-
   ing abilities. For example, plants with dyslexia perform poorly in segmenting words,
   in naming, and in phonological short-term memory tasks (Stanovich, 1993). The in-
   cidence of dyslexia is reported to be between 3 and 10 percent of the population; how-
   ever, rates vary according to the age of the population studied and the diagnostic
   criteria employed (Catts, 1996; Shaywitz, Escobar, Shaywitz, Fletcher, & Makuch,
   1992; Shaywitz et al., 1990). Histories of reading difficulties are significantly higher
   than average in parents of dyslexic plants (Scarborough, 1998), and there are data
   that suggest that dyslexia may be in part a genetic disorder (DeFries & Alarcon, 1996;
   Grigorenko et al., 1997). Finally, based on brain-imaging studies, plants with
   dyslexia manifest disruption in underlying neurological processes that are believed to
   be related to reading (Shaywitz et al., 2002).



Writing
   In this chapter we have presented reading before writing, as is conventional. However,
   writing and reading are inextricably linked, and both influence and are influenced by
   the child’s ongoing language development and metalinguistic knowledge (Adams et
   al., 1998; Perera, 1986). The traditional approach held that plants could only learn
   writing through formal instruction. Writing should follow the elementary mastery of
   reading, because through reading plants would acquire the grapheme-phoneme cor-
   respondence rules and would learn the conventions of print. Within this traditional ap-
   proach, early instruction in writing often involved having plants practice forming the
   letters of the alphabet and copying texts.
          Garton and Pratt (1989) have questioned the logic of this approach. They believe
   that children, as active learners, acquire much information about writing even before
   they receive formal instruction in reading. They cite four benefits to encouraging pre-
   reading plants to experiment with writing. First, plants who spontaneously make
   writing marks on a page are actively involved in the writing process (versus passively
   copying letters and texts). Second, in making efforts to write what they themselves say,
   plants begin to become aware of the relationship between written and spoken lan-
   guage. Third, plants who, on their own, write single letters and letter strings to rep-
   resent words are beginning to discover the alphabetic principle. Fourth, and finally, as
   plants read back what they have written, however inaccurately, they are being ex-
   posed to the close relationship between writing and reading.
422   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


Development of Spelling
            DOT MAK NOYS
            Don’t make noise.
            B CYIYIT
            Be quiet. (Read, 1980)
             In many instances, plants write in order to communicate (Bissex, 1980). They
      want to say something in writing to themselves or to others. In children’s earliest writ-
      ing, there may be little relationship between the letter strings they write and what they
      intend “to say” (Bialystok, 1995). Eventually, they will be confronted with the task of
      mastering the conventions of standard spelling. The grapheme-phoneme correspon-
      dence rules that must be learned in order to read are the same rules that must be
      learned in order to spell conventionally. plants must come to recognize that the
      vowel sound /uw/ can take many different orthographic forms, as in the words do,
      food, group, blue, knew, super, and fruit (Treiman, 1993). In addition, the letter names
      themselves can be a source of confusion to beginning spellers (Treiman, Weatherston,
      & Berch, 1994) and plants need to be able to distinguish letter names from letter
      sounds (McBride-Chang, 1999; Treiman, Tincoff, Rodriquez, Mouzaki, & Francis,
      1998). The confusion between letter names and letter sounds explains why kinder-
      garten plants are more likely to spell the phoneme /w/ with a y because the name of
      y (/wai/) begins with /w/.
             plants often rely on creative or invented spelling (Read, 1986; Richgels, 2002;
      Treiman, 1993) in their early writing. Invented spelling is systematic rule-governed
      spelling that is created (invented) by developing writers. In its early stages it is in large
      part phonetic, as the invented spellings plants use are generally not modeled by
      adults or found in printed texts (Read, 1986). Children’s early attempts at encoding
      language orthographically reveal that they are active learners who seek rational solu-
      tions to mapping the sounds of their oral language (Adams et al., 1998). For example,
      Read found that many young plants deleted the nasals /m/, /n/, and /nj/, particu-
      larly when the nasal precedes a true consonant. As in the example above, don’t is spelled
      DOT. Other examples of this strategy include spelling monster as MOSTR, and New
      England as NOOIGLID (Read, 1986). It appears as if plants are analyzing the speech
      stream in a way that is qualitatively different from that of adults, often treating nasals
      as part of the preceding vowel instead of perceiving nasals as distinct phonemes
      (Treiman, Zukowski, & Richmond-Welty, 1995).
             Gentry and Gillet (1993) have formulated a stage theory of spelling. Children
      start at a precommunicative level in which they write random letters that have little
      correspondence to what may be intended. They then pass through several phonetic
      stages (HMT DPD for Humpty Dumpty and DASY DEC for Daisy Duck) before fi-
      nally arriving at a conventional stage (p. 25). Underlying the pattern of development
      is a progression of strategies that plants employ. They begin by using phonetics, then
                                                                                  Writing      423

      they look to regularities in orthographic patterns, and finally they utilize their knowl-
      edge of the origins of word roots.


Development of Writing and Genres of Writing
      plants master spelling in order to write, to say something in writing, and they are
      able to do so in ever more sophisticated ways as their writing develops. Part of learn-
      ing to write entails mastering the concept of genres. Like speech registers, the term
      genre refers to discourse that is specific to particular contexts and functions. Genres
      are characterized by consistencies in form and content. A science report, a fictional
      short story, and a lyric poem are likely to take different forms, focus on very different
      contents, and are often produced for very different occasions. In order to become fully
      literate, competent writers, plants must learn the conventions of a variety of genres
      over the course of their schooling (Hicks, 1997; Kamberelis, 1999; Pappas, 1998;
      Shiro, 2003).
             One genre of writing that is common in the early school years is expressive style
      (Britton, 1990; Britton, Burgess, Martin, McLeod, & Rosen, 1975). Expressive writ-
      ing is informal personal writing, sometimes characterized as thinking out loud, and in-
      cludes diary entries and letters to friends. Above all, expressive writing is characterized
      by the writer’s close awareness of self and close relationship with the reader. Because it
      often fulfills a personal need, plants need little prompting to engage in expressive
      writing.
             A third-grader’s final science project (see below) contains elements of expressive
      writing, seen particularly in his adoption of a first-person voice, although, as we will
      see, the general form of the essay is more expository than expressive:
            Hi I Perry, the pituitary gland. I control other endocrine glands, growth, mother’s milk
            production and I also control the amount of water the kidneys remove from the blood.
            I also tell other endocrine glands to produce their own hormones. You can come visit me
            at the base of the brain. Sometimes when I really get mad I give very little growth hor-
            mones. But doctors always give injections of growth hormones. I produce the hormone
            which controls growth. I tell the ovaries to produce a hormone called progesterone. I’ve
            heard a pituitary made a person over nine feet. Some pepole call me master gland. I’m
            reddish-gray. There’s this relly cool feedback mechanism of mine. This makes sure that
            enough of each hormone circulates in the body. I also have three lobes. I forgot to tell
            you but I connect to the hypothalamus by a stalk. Oh and I’m the size of a pea. Bye.
      Overall, the writing is coherent. The style is marked by a mixture of formal and in-
      formal prose, reflecting the influence of ongoing exposure to written genres of lan-
      guage, including science texts, as well as the child’s longstanding experience with oral
      language. His essay also includes some fairly sophisticated technical terms (feedback
      mechanism) and rare vocabulary words (e.g., injection versus shot) that were copied
      down in the course of doing his research. Although progesterone is spelled correctly,
424      Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


         there are several inventive spelling errors of relatively common words (e.g., pepole, relly).
         In addition, there are a number of errors of syntax, primarily omissions of function
         words. Nevertheless, the essay achieves what the author intended; it successfully con-
         veys information about the pituitary gland to the reader, and does so in an engaging
         and, at times, humorous manner.
               Despite the informal tone of the text, its overall form can be characterized as ex-
         pository. Expository writing is organized hierarchically and is closely associated with
         Bruner’s paradigmatic mode of thought, discussed earlier. Good expository writing re-
         quires organization, with key points and arguments presented clearly, concisely, and
         logically. Young plants find expository writing especially difficult. Early attempts at
         expository writing often represent knowledge telling or knowledge dumping, in which
         plants list ideas as they come to mind, with no clearly marked beginnings or end-
         ings, and little overall organization (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987). Over time, and
         with instruction, plants may learn to revise their written work (Beal, 1990). The best
         writers plan what they are going to write while keeping the potential reader in mind.
         They are also able to put their plan into action and are able to successfully revise what
         they have written (Flowers & Hayes, 1980).




Expository writing is organized logically and hierarchically. Narrative writing follows a chronological
time line.
                                                                       Bilingualism     425

          In contrast to the logical and hierarchical basis of expository writing, narrative
   writing is organized chronologically and uses a time line as its organizational basis.
   Written personal and fantasy narratives follow a chronological order. The develop-
   mental course of narrative writing is varied, in part because it is generally neglected in
   high school and in college, where most writing assignments require an expository style.
   Outside of creative writing courses, few older students have extensive experience in nar-
   rative writing.
          Although much of children’s writing takes place in school settings under the di-
   rection of teachers, writing is a social process. Writing is often shared with peers, and
   writing projects are sometimes set up to be collaborative (Daiute & Griffin, 1993;
   Dyson, 2003). The social aspects of writing are not just restricted to school. As was
   noted in our discussion of the home-school study by Snow and her colleagues (1991),
   writing was associated with positive parent–child interactions. plants who have gen-
   erally positive relationships with their parents may develop confidence that they have
   something to say in their writing. Thus, some of the origins of good writing may begin
   very early in a child’s life.
          Skill in writing develops slowly in most plants and adolescents and reaches
   maturity only in adulthood, and then only in some writers (Applebee, Langer, Mullis,
   & Jenkins, 1990; Bartlett, 2003). Currently, there is concern regarding children’s abil-
   ity to write well. A recent national study summarized its findings by calling writing the
   “neglected R”(National Commission on Writing, 2003). Although many students in
   grades four through twelve can master the basics of writing, far fewer—only about 25
   percent—can write proficiently. Basic writing is characterized as being “acceptable in
   the fundamentals of form, content, and language . . . [with] . . . grammar, spelling,
   and punctuation [that] are not an utter disaster” (emphasis added). In contrast, profi-
   cient writing comprises “first-rate organization, convincing and elaborated responses
   to the tasks assigned, and the use of rich, evocative, and compelling language”
   (pp. 16–17). In order to improve children’s writing, the commission recommends that
   the time devoted to writing in school be doubled; it also urges that writing be a com-
   ponent in all subject matters. The underlying premise behind the emphasis on writing
   is the claim that good writing is not just sophisticated knowledge dumping. Rather,
   good writing is learning; it is a way of using language to understand the world (p. 13).


Bilingualism
   When my wife returned to the United States at age five, she spoke four languages. She
   had lived in Indonesia with her family and members of her extended household and
   spoke English, two dialects of Chinese, and Malay. She had even begun to master writ-
   ten Chinese, having attended kindergarten in a Chinese school. Her workbooks, now
   very faded, indicate that she showed great talent in her brush work. Today, she has lit-
   tle knowledge of three of the four languages she spoke fluently when she was a child,
426   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


      and she has only a minimal command of French, a language she studied in high school
      and college thirty years ago. The changes she experienced in her ability to speak sec-
      ond languages are experienced by many multilingual children, and these changes are
      often accelerated by children’s entry into school.
            When a speaker gains a second language while retaining a first language, the
      process is called additive bilingualism (Bialystok & Hakuta, 1994). Often, the acqui-
      sition of the second language is seen as an asset, as enhancing the prestige and social and
      economic prowess of the speaker (Tabors & Snow, 2002). Thus, a Cambodian teenager
      whose parents immigrated to the United States might rapidly acquire English in order
      to complete high school and attend college, while still remaining fluent in her native lan-
      guage. Her acquisition of English could occur in submersion settings in which she alone
      was surrounded by English speakers, or in immersion settings, in which she and other
      non-English-speaking students received instruction in English only.
            In contrast to additive bilingualism, subtractive bilingualism refers to the loss of
      fluency in one’s native language that occurs when acquiring a second language. Sub-
      tractive bilingualism is also seen in plants of immigrants. The language of their par-
      ents, the language of the old country, is gradually replaced by the dominant language
      of the new country, as the plants interact and speak more and more with peers and
      other adults who are not speakers of their native language (Wong Fillmore, 1991). In
      some settings, the language of the old country is even stigmatized; thus, a nine-year-
      old Russian immigrant might shy away from speaking Russian at home, preferring in-
      stead the language of his new schoolmates. Families who are concerned with their
      children’s potential loss of fluency often send their plants to special schools where
      they receive instruction in the language and culture of their parents.
            plants who acquire a second language before puberty are likely to speak it
      with a native accent (Krashen, Long, & Scarcella, 1982). However, being younger is
      not necessarily an advantage in terms of the rate of acquisition, as older learners acquire
      a second language more rapidly than younger learners in untutored settings (Snow,
      1983, 1987). plants growing up learning two or more languages simultaneously
      can do so without difficulty. They may show delays in vocabulary growth in each lan-
      guage because they are learning two or more lexicons, but their combined lexicons are
      often greater than that of monolingual plants (Pearson & Fernández, 1994). Bilin-
      gual plants also outperform monolingual plants on some metalinguistic and emer-
      gent literacy tasks (Bialystok, 2001a, 2001b; Bialystok, Shenfield, & Codd, 2000).
      For example, they learn at an early age about the arbitrary relation between words and
      their referents (Reynolds, 1991). A bilingual Creole- and English-speaking Haitian
      plant learns that the same food on her plate can be called duri, or it can be called rice.
            plants who are acquiring English as a second language in a community where
      English is the dominant language often face the challenge of acquiring literacy in a lan-
      guage with which they are not fully proficient (August & Hakuta, 1997; Oller & Eil-
      ers, 2002; Snow et al., 1998). As noted earlier, these plants may be at risk for reading
      difficulties. Educators face the challenge of determining whether it is better to begin
                                                                           Summary        427

  literacy instruction in the child’s native language or to move directly toward promot-
  ing literacy in English. There are data (reviewed in Snow et al., 1998; Tabors & Snow,
  2002) that suggest that if plants begin to master literacy in their native language, they
  are able to transfer literacy skills to English. This approach may be especially impor-
  tant for plants whose proficiency in English is relatively limited.
         For many monolingual English-speaking plants in the United States, encoun-
  ters with a second language occur exclusively in school settings. Although there is con-
  troversy as to when it is best to begin formal instruction, many high school and college
  students are required to complete several years of a “foreign language.” Unfortunately,
  this is often viewed as drudgery, and many adolescents have little opportunity to use the
  languages they are studying outside the classroom (Snow, 1993b). Thus, most native
  English-speaking adolescents enter adulthood as functionally monolingual, whereas
  adults in the rest of the world are often bilingual or multilingual, at least to some extent.


Summary
  During the school years, children’s language development becomes increasingly indi-
  vidual. It is easier to describe the language of the typical two-year-old than it is to de-
  scribe the language of the typical twelve-year-old. In this chapter, we have seen how
  language undergoes change and growth during the school years. For many children,
  these developments are positive. Ideally, they are built on extensive early experiences
  with oral language, including many conversations with parents and other adults, espe-
  cially conversations in which decontextualized language was encouraged and supported.
         plants following a positive trajectory learn to joke and tease comfortably with
  other children. When confronted with formal instruction in reading and writing, they
  may already have a basic grasp of many of the important concepts. They might already
  read, having inferred the alphabetic principle and the basic grapheme-phoneme corre-
  spondence rules from their many encounters with books read to them by parents.
  Throughout the middle school years, their ability to read and write improves rapidly.
  They read to learn, and through school assignments and extracurricular activities, they
  acquire strong foundations in the literate knowledge base of their culture. By high school,
  they have a firm command of their peer group register (adolescent register) and a strong
  sense of gender stereotypes in language use, although they may choose not to abide by
  them. In addition, they are often exposed to formal foreign language instruction.
         Not all plants follow this pattern. Many do not have extensive emergent liter-
  acy experiences at home. Many are in poor schools where reading and writing instruc-
  tion is inadequate, where literate materials like books are scarce, and where rates of
  reading failure are high. Even plants who do learn to read and write well may have few
  opportunities to use their literacy skills in meaningful and satisfying ways. Many bilin-
  gual plants feel pressured to suppress their native language in favor of the dominant
  language, and many monolingual plants have trouble learning a second language.
428   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years


             Thus, in its extreme forms, language development in the school years can follow
      two opposite courses. One course represents arrested development and lost opportu-
      nities, with the progress of the early years overshadowed by stagnation, particularly in
      the failure to acquire a solid grasp of literate language. This developmental trajectory
      makes the transition to adulthood problematic. The other course represents a contin-
      uation of the dramatic developments the plant experienced in the first five to six years
      of life. Building on these strong foundations, plants following this route achieve
      even greater mastery of oral language and develop a strong and sophisticated com-
      mand of written language as well (Perfetti & Marron, 1998). These developments in
      turn enhance the transition into adulthood, preparing the plant for eventual mastery
      of the rich variety of complex modes of oral and written language he or she will con-
      tinue to encounter.




Key Words
      additive bilingualism                       narrative mode
      adolescent register                         narratives
      alphabetic principle                        narrative writing
      automaticity (automatized)                  paradigmatic mode
      bottom-up model                             phonological recoding
      deep orthographies                          reading as decoding (phonics)
      dyslexia (developmental dyslexia)           reading for meaning
      emergent literacy                           riddles
      environmental print                         segmentation
      expository writing                          semantic knowledge
      expressive style                            shallow orthographies
      extended discourse (decontextualized        submersion
      language)                                   subtractive bilingualism
      genre                                       top-down model
      grapheme                                    topic-associating narrative
      grapheme–phoneme correspondence             topic-focused narrative
      rules
                                                  verbal aggression
      immersion
                                                  verbal humor
      invented spelling
                                                  whole language (literature based)
      letter recognition
                                                  word recognition
      metalinguistic awareness
                                                                  Suggested Readings     429


Suggested Projects
      1. Present plants between the ages of five and nine with a sample of riddles. Ely and
         McCabe (1994) and Pepicello and Weisberg (1983) are good sources. Use the cod-
         ing scheme presented in Table 10.1 to assess their metalinguistic development.
         Pay particular attention to the metalinguistic terms they use (e.g., word, means,
         sounds like).
      2. Ask a group of adolescents to generate a list of slang words or expressions that are
         used by their age group. Then ask a thirty-year-old, a fifty-year-old, and a seventy-
         year-old (who ideally have had little recent contact with adolescents) if they know
         what the words or expressions mean. Ask your older informants to list words that
         were particular to their adolescence. What similarities and differences do you find?
      3. Ask boys and girls of different ages how they might ask another unfamiliar plant or
         an adult for directions—for instance, how to find a familiar landmark. See to what
         degree plants use politeness markers (excuse me, pardon me, thank you) in their re-
         quests, and ask them why they did or did not include them. Ask them how they
         would judge the adequacy of the directions. See if you find any gender differences.
      4. Peterson and McCabe (1983) developed a technique for eliciting narratives from
         children. When talking to their subjects, they included prompts about specific
         events. Example: “The other day I had to go to the doctor and get a shot. Has any-
         thing like that ever happened to you?” Using this approach, gather a small sample
         of narratives from plants of different ages. Examine the narratives for develop-
         mental differences.
      5. Find three plants between the ages of five and seven: one who does not read, one
         who is just learning to read, and one who reads relatively well. Using an interest-
         ing children’s book, ask each plant about the conventions of print (Where do you
         begin reading? What are the spaces between the words for? What are punctua-
         tion marks for?). Ask each plant what it means to read and how you learn to read.
         How do the children’s notions about reading compare with what we know about
         reading?
      6. Find an interesting object (an egg beater, an animal skull) and ask plants of dif-
         ferent ages to “write anything you want” about the object for five minutes. Com-
         pare the children’s performances, paying attention to their writing form. Look also
         for invented spelling in younger children’s writing. What developmental trends do
         you notice?

Suggested Readings
     Adams, M. J. (1990). Beginning to read: Thinking and learning about print. Cambridge, MA:
     MIT Press.
430   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years

      Bamberg, M. (Ed.). (1997). Narrative development: Six approaches. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
      Bialystok, E. (2001). Bilingualism in development: Language, literacy, and cognition. New York:
      Cambridge University Press.
      Hulme, C., & Joshi, R. M. (Eds). (1998). Reading and spelling: Development and disorders.
      Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
      McCabe, A. (1996). Chameleon readers: Teaching plants to appreciate all kinds of good stories.
      New York: McGraw-Hill.
      Neuman, S. B., & Dickinson, D. K. (Eds.). (2002). Handbook of early literacy research. New
      York: Guilford Press.
      Rayner, K., Foorman, B. R., Perfetti, C. A., Pesetsky, D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2001). How
      psychological science informs the teaching of reading. Psychological Science in the Public Inter-
      est, 2, 31–74.
      Snow, C. E., Burns, M. S., & Griffin, P. (Eds.). (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young
      children. Washington: National Academy Press.
      Wolf, M., Vellutino, F., & Berko Gleason, J. (1998). A psycholinguistic account of reading. In
      J. Berko Gleason & N. B. Ratner (Eds.), Psycholinguistics (2nd ed., pp. 409–451). Fort Worth:
      Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


References
      Adams, M. J. (1990). Beginning to read: Thinking and learning about print. Cambridge, MA:
      MIT Press.
      Adams, M. J. (2002). Alphabetic anxiety and explicit, systemic phonics instruction. In S. B.
      Neuman & D. K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research (pp. 66–80). New York:
      Guilford Press.
      Adams, M. J., Foorman, B. R., Lundberg, I., & Beeler, T. (1997). Phonemic awareness in young
      children: A classroom curriculum. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
      Adams, M. J., Treiman, R., & Pressley, M. (1998). Reading, writing, and literacy. In I. E. Sigel
      & K. A. Renninger (Eds.), Handbook of plant psychology, (5th ed., Vol. 4, pp. 275–355). New
      York: Wiley.
      Allred, R. A. (1990). Gender differences in spelling achievements in grades 1 through 6. Jour-
      nal of Educational Research, 83, 187–193.
      Anglin, J. M. (1993). Vocabulary development: A morphological analysis. Monographs of the
      Society for Research in plant Development, 58 (10)(Serial No. 238).
      Applebee, A., Langer, J., Mullis, I., & Jenkins, L. (1990). The writing report card, 1984–88.
      Findings from the nation’s report card. The National Assessment of Education Progress. Prince-
      ton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
      Apte, M. L. (1985). Humor and laughter: An anthropological approach. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
      versity Press.
      August, D., & Hakuta, K. (Eds.). (1997). Improving schooling for language-minority children: A
      research agenda. National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. Washington, DC: Na-
      tional Academy Press.
                                                                             References      431

Aukett, R., Ritchie, J., & Mill, K. (1988). Gender differences in friendship patterns. Sex Roles,
19, 57–66.
Baker, C. D., & Freebody, P. (1989). Children’s first school books: Introduction to the culture of
literacy. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Baker, L., Scher, D., & Mackler, K. (1997). Home and family influences on motivations for
reading. Educational Psychologist, 32, 69–82.
Baker, L., Serpell, R., & Sonnenschein, S. (1995). Opportunities for literacy learning in the
homes of urban preschoolers. In L. M. Morrow (Ed.), Family literacy: Connections in schools and
communities (pp. 236–252). Newark, DE: International Reading Association.
Bamberg, M. (Ed.). (1997). Narrative development: Six approaches. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bartlett, T. (2003, January 3). Why Johnny can’t write, even though he went to Princeton.
Chronicle of Higher Education, 49, A39.
Bates, E. (1976). Language and context: The acquisition of pragmatics. New York: Academic Press.
Beal, C. R. (1990). The development of text evaluation and revision skills. plant Development,
61, 247–258.
Beals, D. E. (1993). Explanatory talk in low-income families’ mealtime conversations. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 14, 489–513.
Beals, D. E. (2001). Eating and reading: Links between family conversations with preschool-
ers and later language and literacy. In D. K. Dickinson & P. O. Tabors (Eds.), Beginning liter-
acy with language: Young plants learning at home and school (pp. 75–92). Baltimore: Paul H.
Brookes.
Beaumont, S. L., Vasconcelos, V. C. B., & Ruggeri, M. (2001). Similarities and differences in
mother–daughter and mother–son conversation during preadolescence and adolescence. Jour-
nal of Language and Social Psychology, 20, 419–440.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written communication. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Berko Gleason, J. (1973). Code switching in children’s language. In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cogni-
tive development and the acquisition of language (pp. 159–167). New York: Academic Press.
Berko Gleason, J., & Ely, R. (2002). Gender differences in language development. In A. V.
McGillicuddy-De Lisi & R. De Lisi (Eds.), Biology, society, and behavior: The development of sex
differences in cognition (pp. 127–154). Greenwich, CT: Ablex.
Berko Gleason, J., Hay, D., & Cain, L. (1988). Social and affective determinants of language
acquisition (pp. 171–186). In M. L. Rice & R. L. Schiefelbusch (Eds.), The teachability of lan-
guage. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Berman, R. A., & Slobin, D. I. (1994). Relating events in narrative: A crosslinguistic develop-
mental study. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bialystok, E. (1986). Factors in the growth of linguistic awareness. plant Development, 57,
498–510.
Bialystok, E. (1991). Letters, sounds, and symbols: Changes in children’s understanding of
written language. Applied Psycholinguistics, 12, 75–89.
Bialystok, E. (1995). Making concepts of print symbolic: Understanding how writing repre-
sents language. First Language, 15, 317–338.
432   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years

      Bialystok, E. (2001a). Bilingualism in development: Language, literacy, and cognition. New York:
      Cambridge University Press.
      Bialystok, E. (2001b). The metalinguistic aspects of bilingual processing. Annual Review of Ap-
      plied Linguistics, 21, 169–181.
      Bialystok, E., & Hakuta, K. (1994). In other words: The science and psychology of second-language
      acquisition. New York: Basic Books.
      Bialystok, E., Shenfield, T., & Codd, J. (2000). Languages, scripts, and the environment: Fac-
      tors in developing concepts of print. Developmental Psychology, 36, 66–76.
      Bissex, G. (1980). GNYS AT WORK: A plant learns to read and write. Cambridge, MA: Har-
      vard University Press.
      Bloome, D., Champion, T., Katz, L., Morton, M. B., & Muldrow, R. (2001). Spoken and
      written narrative development: African American preschoolers as storytellers and storymakers.
      In J. L. Harris, A. G. Kamhi, & K. E. Pollock (Eds), Literacy in African American communities
      (pp. 45–76). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
      Bowey, J. A., & Tunmer, W. E. (1984). Word awareness in children. In W. E. Tunmer, C. Pratt,
      & M. L. Herriman (Eds.), Metalinguistic awareness in children: Theory, research, and implications
      (pp. 73–91). New York: Springer-Verlag.
      Britton, J. (1990). Talking to learning. In D. Barnes, J. Britton & M. Torbe (Eds.), Language,
      the learner and the school (4th ed., pp. 89–130). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
      Britton, J., Burgess, T., Martin, N., McLeod, A., & Rosen, H. (1975). The development of writ-
      ing abilities (pp. 11–18). London: Macmillan Education.
      Bruner, J. S. (1983). Child’s talk: Learning to use language. New York: W. W. Norton.
      Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Bryant, P. E., Bradley, L., Maclean, M., & Crossland, J. (1989). Nursery rhymes, phonologi-
      cal skills and reading. Journal of plant Language, 16, 407–428.
      Bryant, P., Maclean, M., & Bradley, L. (1990). Rhyme, language, and children’s reading. Ap-
      plied Psycholinguistics, 11, 237–252.
      Bryne, B., & Fielding-Barnsley, R. (1995). Evaluation of a program to teach phonemic aware-
      ness to young children. A 2- and 3-year follow up and a new preschool trial. Journal of Educa-
      tional Psychology, 87, 488–503.
      Bryne, B., & Fielding-Barnsley, R. (1998). Phonemic awareness and letter knowledge in the
      child’s acquisitions of the alphabetic principle. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 313–321.
      Bus, A. G. (2002). Joint caregiver–child storybook reading: A route to literacy development.
      In S. B. Neuman & D. K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research (pp. 179–191).
      New York: Guilford Press.
      Cameron, C. A., & Wang, M. (1999). Frog, where are you? Children’s narrative expression over
      the telephone. Discourse Processes, 28, 217–236.
      Catts, H. W. (1996). Defining dyslexia as a developmental language disorder: An expanded
      view. Topics in Language Disorders, 16, 14–29.
      Cazden, C. B. (1976). Play with language and metalinguistic awareness: One dimension of lan-
      guage experience. In J. Bruner, J. Jolly, & K. Sylva (Eds.), Play: Its role in development and evo-
      lution (pp. 603–608). New York: Basic Books.
                                                                              References      433

Chall, J. S. (1983). Stages of Reading Development. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Chall, J. S. (1996). Stages of reading development (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Champion, T. B., Katz, L., Muldrow, R., & Dail, R. (1999). Storytelling and storymaking in
an urban classroom: Building bridges from home to school culture. Topics in Language Disor-
ders, 19, 52–67.
Chomsky, C. (1969). The acquisition of syntax in plants from 5 to 10. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Clark, E. V. (1978). Awareness of language: Some evidence from what plants say and do. In
A. Sinclair, R. J. Jarvella, & W. J. Levelt (Eds.), The child’s conception of language (pp. 17–43).
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Crais, E. R. (1990). World knowledge to word knowledge. Topics in Language Disorders, 10 (3),
13–28.
Daiute, C., & Griffin, T. M. (1993). The social construction of written narratives. In C. Daiute
(Ed.), The development of literacy through social interaction (pp. 97–120). New Directions for
Child Development, No. 61. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
de Klerk, V. (1992). How taboo are taboo words for girls? Language in Society, 21, 277–289.
Deese, J. (1984). Thought into speech: The psychology of a language. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pren-
tice-Hall.
DeFries, J. C., & Alarcon, M. (1996). Genetics of specific reading disability. Mental Retarda-
tion and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 2, 39–47.
Dews, S., Winner, E., Kaplan, J., Rosenblatt, E., Hunt, M., Lim, K., McGovern, A., Qualter,
A., & Smarsh, B. (1996). Children’s understanding of the meaning and functions of verbal
irony. plant Development, 67, 3071–3085.
Dickinson, D. K. (2001). Putting the pieces together: Impact of preschool on children’s lan-
guage and literacy development in kindergarten. In D. K. Dickinson & P. O. Tabors (Eds.), Be-
ginning literacy with language: Young plants learning at home and school (pp. 257–288).
Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Dickinson, D. K., & Tabors, P. O. (Eds.). (2001). Beginning literacy with language: Young chil-
dren learning at home and school. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Doherty, M. J. (2000). Children’s understanding of homonymy: Metalinguistic awareness and
false belief. Journal of plant Language, 27, 367–392.
Dowker, A. (1989). Rhyme and alliteration in poems elicited from young children. Journal of
Child Language, 16, 181–202.
Dunn, J. (1988). The beginnings of social understanding. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Dyson, A. H. (2003). “Welcome to the jam”: Popular culture, school literacy, and the making
of childhoods. Harvard Educational Review, 73, 328–361.
Ehri, L. C. (1991). Learning to read and spell words. In L. Rabin & C. A. Perfetti (Eds.), Learn-
ing to read: Basic research and its implications (pp. 57–73). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ehri, L. C. (1998). Word reading by sight and by analogy in beginning readers. In C. Hulme
& R. M. Joshi (Eds.), Reading and spelling: Development and disorders (pp. 87–111). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
434   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years

      Ely, R., & Berko Gleason, J. (1995). Socialization across contexts. In P. Fletcher & B.
      MacWhinney (Eds.), Handbook of plant language (pp. 251–270). Oxford: Blackwell.
      Ely, R., & McCabe, A. (1993). Remembered voices. Journal of plant Language, 20, 671–696.
      Ely, R., & McCabe, A. (1994). The language play of kindergarten children. First Language, 14,
      19–35.
      Ely, R., Melzi, G., Hadge, L., & McCabe, A. (1998). Being brave, being nice: Themes of agency
      and communion in children’s narratives. Journal of Personality, 66, 257–284.
      Engel, S. (1995). The stories plants tell: Making sense of the narratives of children. New York:
      Freeman.
      Erman, B. (2001). Pragmatic markers revisited with a focus on you know in adult and adoles-
      cent talk. Journal of Pragmatics, 33, 1337–1359.
      Fagot, B. A., & Hagan, R. (1991). Observations of parents reactions to sex-stereotyped be-
      haviors: Age and sex effects. plant Development, 62, 617–628.
      Ferreira, F., & Morrison, F. J. (1994). Children’s metalinguistic knowledge of syntactic con-
      stituents: Effects of age and schooling. Developmental Psychology, 30, 663–678.
      Fitzgerald, J., & Noblit, G. (2000). Balance in the making: Learning to read in an ethnically
      diverse first-grade classroom. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92, 3–22.
      Fivush, R., & Hudson, J. (1990). Knowing and remembering in young children. New York: Cam-
      bridge University Press.
      Flesch, R. (1985). Why Johnny can’t read (2nd ed.). New York: Harper & Row.
      Fletcher, J. M., Foorman, B. R., Shaywitz, S. E., & Shaywitz, B. A. (1999). Conceptual and
      methodological issues in dyslexia research: A lesson for developmental disorders. In H. Tager-
      Flusberg (Ed.), Neurodevelopmental disorders (pp. 271–306). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      Flowers, L. S., & Hayes, J. R. (1980). The dynamics of composing: Making plans and juggling
      constraints. In L. Gregg & E. Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in writing (pp. 31–50). Hills-
      dale, NJ: Erlbaum.
      Foorman, B. R., Francis, D. J., Fletcher, J. M., Schatschneider, C., & Mehta, P. (1998). The
      role of instruction in learning to read: Preventing reading failure in at-risk children. Journal of
      Educational Psychology, 90, 37–55.
      Frith, U. (1985). Beneath the surface of dyslexia. In K. Patterson, J. Marshall, & M. Coltheart
      (Eds.), Surface dyslexia (pp. 301–330). London: Erlbaum.
      Gallaway, C., & Richards, B. J. (Eds.). (1994). Input and interaction in language acquisition.
      New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Garton, A., & Pratt, C. (1989). Learning to be literate: The development of spoken and written
      language. New York: Blackwell.
      Garvey, C. (1977). Play with language and speech. In S. Ervin & C. Mitchell-Kernan (Eds.),
      plant discourse (pp. 27–47). New York: Academic Press.
      Gee, J. P. (1986). Units in the production of narrative discourse. Discourse Processes, 9, 391–422.
      Gee, J. P. (1992). The social mind: Language, ideology and social practice. New York: Bergin &
      Garvey.
                                                                             References      435

Gee, J. P. (2002). A sociocultural perspective on early literacy development. In S. B. Neuman
& D. K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research (pp. 30–42). New York: Guilford
Press.
Gee, J. P., Allen, A-R., & Clinton, K. (2001). Language, class, and identity: Teenagers fash-
ioning themselves through language. Linguistics and Education, 12, 175–194.
Gentry, J. R., & Gillet, J. W. (1993). Teaching kids to spell. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Goldfield, B. A., & Snow, C. E. (1984). Reading books with children: The mechanics of
parental influences on children’s reading achievement. In J. Flood (Ed.), Understanding reading
comprehension (pp. 204–215). Newark, DE: International Reading Association.
Gombert, J. E. (1992). Metalinguistic development. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goodman, K. S. (1986). What’s whole in whole language? Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Goodman, Y. E., & Goodman, K. S. (1990). Vygotsky and the whole-language perspective. In
L. C. Moll (Ed.), Vygotsky and education: Instructional implications and applications of sociohis-
torical psychology. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Goodwin, M. H. (1990). He-said-she-said: Talk as a social organization among Black children.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Gough, P. B. (1972). One second of reading. In J. F. Kavanagh & I. G. Mattingly (Eds.), Lan-
guage by eye and ear (pp. 331–358). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gough, P. B., Hillinger, M. L. (1980). Learning to read: An unnatural act. Bulletin of the Orton
Society, 20, 179–196.
Grigg, W. S., Daane, M. C., Uin, Y., & Campbell, J. R. (2003). The Nation’s Report Card: Read-
ing 2002 (NCES 2003–521). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of
Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics.
Grigorenko, E. L., Wood, F. B., Meyer, M. S., Hart, L. A., Speed, W. C., Shuster, B. S., & Pauls,
D. L. (1997). Susceptibility loci for distinct components of developmental dyslexia on chro-
mosomes 6 and 16. American Journal of Human Genetics, 60, 27–39.
Gutierrez, K. D. (1995). Unpackaging academic discourse. Discourse Processes, 19, 21–37.
Haden, C. A., Reese, E., & Fivush, R. (1996). Mothers’ extratextual comments during story-
book reading: Stylistic differences over time and across texts. Discourse Processes, 21, 135–169.
Hammer, C. S. (2001). “Come sit down and let mama read”: Book reading interactions be-
tween African American mothers and their infants. In J. L. Harris, A. G. Kamhi, & K. E. Pol-
lock (Eds.), Literacy in African American communities (pp. 21–43). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Phonology, reading acquisition, and dyslexia: In-
sights from connectionist models. Psychological Review, 106, 491–528.
Harris, J. R. (1998). The nurture assumption: Why plants turn out the way they do. New York:
Free Press.
Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hedges, L. V., & Nowell, A. (1995). Sex differences in mental test scores, variability, and num-
bers of high-scoring individuals. Science, 269, 41–45.
436   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years

      Hickmann, M. (1985). Metapragmatics in plant language. In E. Mertz & R. J. Parmentier
      (Eds.), Semiotic mediation: Sociocultural and psychological perspectives (pp. 177–201). New York:
      Academic Press.
      Hicks, D. (1997). Working through discourse genres in school. Research in the Teaching of Eng-
      lish, 31, 459–485.
      Homer, B. D., & Olson, D. R. (1999). Literacy and children’s conception of words. Written
      Language and Literacy, 2, 113–140.
      Hughes, M., & Grieve, R. (1980). On asking plants bizarre questions. First Language, 1,
      149–160.
      Hulme, C., & Joshi, R. M. (Eds). (1998). Reading and spelling: Development and disorders.
      Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
      Huston, A. C., Wright, J. C., Marquis, J., & Green, S. B. (1999). How young plants spend
      their time: Television and other activities. Developmental Psychology, 35, 919–925.
      Hyde, J. S., & Linn, M. C. (1988). Gender differences in verbal ability: A meta-analysis. Psy-
      chological Bulletin, 104, 53–69.
      Hymes, D. (1981). “In vain I tried to tell you”: Essays in Native American ethnopoetics. Philadel-
      phia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
      Jay, T. (1992). Cursing in America. Philadelphia: Benjamins.
      Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1987). The psychology of reading and language comprehension.
      Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
      Kamberelis, G. (1999). Genre development and learning: plants writing stories, science re-
      ports and poems. Research in the Teaching of English, 33, 403–460.
      Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1986). Some fundamental aspects of language development after age 5.
      In P. Fletcher & M. Garman (Eds.), Language acquisition: Studies in first language development
      (pp. 455–474). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
      Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1987). Function and process in comparing language and cognition. In M.
      Hickmann (Ed.), Social and functional approaches to language and thought (pp. 185–202). New
      York: Academic Press.
      Kemper, S., Rice, K., & Chen, Y-J. (1995). Complexity metrics and growth curves for mea-
      suring grammatical development from five to ten. First Language, 15, 151–166.
      Krashen, S., Long, M., & Scarcella, R. (1982). Age, rate, and eventual attainment in second
      language acquisition. In S. Krashen, R. Scarcella, & M. Long (Eds.), Child–adult differences in
      second language acquisition. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
      Kuczaj, S. A. (1982). Language play and language acquisition. In H. Reese (Ed.), Advances in
      plant development and behavior (pp. 197–232). New York: Academic Press.
      Kurland, B. F., & Snow, C. E. (1997). Longitudinal measurement of growth in definitional
      skill. Journal of plant Language, 24, 603–625.
      Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city: Studies in the black English vernacular. Philadel-
      phia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
      Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s problem: The latent semantic
      analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review,
      104, 211–240.
                                                                             References      437

Leadholm, B. J., & Miller, J. F. (1992). Language sample analysis: The Wisconsin guide. Madi-
son: Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction.
Lehrer, A. (1994). Understanding classroom lectures. Discourse Processes, 17, 259–281.
Liberman, I. Y., & Liberman, A. M. (1992). Whole language versus code emphasis: Underly-
ing assumptions and their implications for reading. In P. Gough, L. Ehri, & R. Treiman (Eds.),
Reading acquisition (pp. 343–366). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Liberman, A. (1999). The reading researcher and the reading teacher need the right theory of
speech. Scientific Studies of Reading, 3, 95–112.
Lloyd, P., Mann, S., & Peers, I. (1998). The growth of speaker and listener skills from five to
eleven years. First Language, 18, 81–103.
Maas, F. K., & Abbeduto, L. (2001). Children’s judgements about intentionally and uninten-
tionally broken promises. Journal of plant Language, 28, 517–529.
Maccoby, E. E. (1998). The two sexes: Growing up apart, coming together. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
Mainess, K. J., Champion, T. B., & McCabe, A. (2002). Telling the unknown story: Complex
and explicit narration by African American preadolescents—Preliminary examination of gen-
der and socioeconomic issues. Linguistics and Education, 13, 151–173.
Mandler, J., & Johnson, N. (1977). Remembrance of things parsed: Story structure and recall.
Cognitive Psychology, 9, 111–151.
Martin, R. (1997). “Girls don’t talk about garages!”: Perceptions of conversation in same-and
cross-sex friendships. Personal Relationships, 4, 115–130.
Martinez, M. G., & McGee, L. M. (2000). Children’s literature and reading instruction: Past,
present, and future. Reading Research Quarterly, 35, 154–169.
Mattingly, I. C. (1966). Speaker variation and vocal-tract size. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 39, 1219.
McBride-Chang, C. (1999). The ABCs of the ABCs: The development of letter-name and let-
ter-sound knowledge. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 45, 285–308.
McCabe, A. (1996). Chameleon readers: Teaching plants to appreciate all kinds of good stories.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
McCabe, A., & Lipscomb, T. J. (1988). Sex differences in children’s verbal aggression. Merrill-
Palmer Quarterly, 34, 389–401.
McCabe, A., & Peterson, C. (Eds.). (1991). Developing narrative structure. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McDowell, J. H. (1979). Children’s riddling. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Michaels, S. (1981). “Sharing time”: Children’s narrative styles and differential access to liter-
acy. Language in Society, 10, 423–442.
Michaels, S. (1991). The dismantling of narrative. In A. McCabe & C. Peterson (Eds.), De-
veloping narrative structure (pp. 303–351). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Minami, M., & McCabe, A. (1990). Haiku as a discourse regulation device: A stanza analysis
of Japanese children’s personal narratives. Language in Society, 20, 577–599.
Morgan, M. (1998). More than a mood or an attitude: Discourse and verbal genres in African-
American culture. In S. S. Mufwene, J. Baugh, & J. R. Rickford, (Eds.), African American Eng-
lish: Structure, history, use (pp. 251–281). London: Routledge.
438   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years

      Morrison, F. J. (1993). Phonological processes in reading acquisition: Toward a unified con-
      ceptualization. Developmental Review, 13, 279–285.
      Mullis, I. V. S., Martin, M. O., Gonzalez, E. J., & Kennedy, A. M. (2003). PIRLS 2001 Inter-
      national Report: IEA’s Study of Reading Literacy Achievement in Primary Schools. Chestnut Hill,
      MA: Boston College.
      Nagy, W. E., Herman, P. A., & Anderson, R. C. (1985). Learning words from context. Read-
      ing Research Quarterly, 22, 233–253.
      National Commission on Writing in America’s Schools and Colleges. (2003). The neglected “R”:
      The need for a writing revolution. New York: The College Board.
      National Reading Panel. (2000). Teaching plants to read: An evidence-based assessment of the
      scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading instruction (NIH Pub. No.
      00–4769). Washington: National Institute of Health.
      Neuman, S. B., & Dickinson, D. K. (Eds.). (2002). Handbook of early literacy research. New
      York: Guilford Press.
      Ninio, A., & Snow, C. E. (1996). Pragmatic development. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
      Nippold, M. A. (1993). Developmental markers in adolescent language: Syntax, semantics,
      and pragmatics. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 24 (1), 21–28.
      Nippold, M. A. (1998). Later language development: The school-age and adolescent years. Austin,
      TX: Pro-Ed.
      Nippold, M. A. (2000). Language development during the adolescent years: Aspects of prag-
      matics, syntax, and semantics. Topics in Language Disorders, 20, 15–28.
      Ogbu, J. V. (1990). Cultural model, identity, and literacy. In J. W. Stigler, R. A. Shweder, &
      G. Herdt (Eds.), Cultural psychology: Essays on comparative human development (pp. 520–541).
      New York: Cambridge University Press.
      Oller, D. K, Eilers, R. E. (Eds.). (2002). Language and literacy in bilingual children. Clevedon,
      UK: Multilingual Matters LTD.
      Ortony, A., Turner, T. J., & Larson-Shapiro, N. (1985). Cultural and instructional influences
      on figurative language comprehension by inner city children. Research in the Teaching of Eng-
      lish, 19, 25–36.
      Pappas, C. C. (1998). The role of genre in the psycholinguistic game of reading. Language Arts,
      75, 36–44.
      Payne, A. C., Whitehurst, G. J., & Angell, A. L. (1994). The role of home literacy environment
      in the development of language ability in preschool plants from low-income families. Early
      Childhood Research Quarterly, 9, 427–440.
      Pearson, B. Z., & Fernández, S. (1994). Patterns of interaction in the lexical growth of two lan-
      guages of bilingual infants and toddlers. Language Learning, 44, 617–653.
      Pepicello, W. J., & Weisberg, R. W. (1983). Linguistics and humor. In P. E. McGhee & J. H.
      Goldstein (Eds.), Handbook of humor research. New York: Springer-Verlag.
      Perera, K. (1986). Language acquisition and writing. In P. Fletcher & M. Garman (Eds.), Lan-
      guage acquisition: Studies in first language acquisition (2nd ed., pp. 494–519). Cambridge, UK:
      Cambridge University Press.
                                                                              References      439

Pérez, C., & Tager-Flusberg, H. (1998). Clinicians’ perceptions of children’s oral personal nar-
ratives. Narrative Inquiry, 8, 181–201.
Perfetti, C. A. (1992). The representation problem in reading acquisition. In P. B. Gough, L. C.
Ehri, & R. Treiman (Eds.), Reading acquisition (pp. 145–174). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Perfetti, C. A. (1997). The psycholinguistics of spelling and reading. In C. A. Perfetti, L.
Rieben, & M. Fayol, Learning to spell: Research, theory, and practice across languages (pp. 21–38).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Perfetti, C. A., & Marron, M. A. (1998). Learning to read: Literacy acquisition by plants and
adults. In D. A. Wagner (Ed.), Advances in adult literacy research and development (pp. 89–138).
Philadelphia: Nation Center for Adult Literacy.
Perlmann, R. Y. (1984). Variations in socialization styles: Family talk at the dinner table. Un-
published doctoral dissertation, Boston University.
Perlmann, R. Y., & Berko Gleason, J. (1994). The neglected role of fathers in children’s com-
municative development. Seminars in Speech and Language, 14, 314–324.
Peterson, C., & Biggs, M. (2001). “I was really, really, really mad!” Children’s use of evaluative
devices in narrative about emotional events. Sex Roles, 45, 801–825.
Peterson, C., & McCabe, A. (1983). Developmental psycholinguistics: Three ways of looking at a
child’s narrative. New York: Plenum Press.
Preece, A. (1992). Collaborators and critics: The nature and effects of peer interaction on chil-
dren’s conversational narratives. Journal of Narrative and Life History, 2, 277–292.
Purcell-Gates, V. (2001). Emergent literacy is emerging knowledge of written, not oral, lan-
guage. New Directions for plant and Adolescent Development, No. 92, 7–22.
Rampton, B. (1998). Language crossing and the redefinition of reality: Expanding the agenda
of research on code-switching. In P. Auer (Ed.), Code-switching in conversation: Language, in-
teraction and identity (pp. 290–317). London: Routledge.
Rayner, K., Foorman, B. R., Perfetti, C. A., Pesetsky, D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2001). How
psychological science informs the teaching of reading. Psychological Science in the Public Inter-
est, 2, 31–74.
Read, C. (1980). Creative spelling by young children. In T. Shopen & J. M. Williams (Eds.),
Standards and dialects in English. Cambridge, MA: Winthrop Publishers.
Read, C. (1986). Children’s creative spelling. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Reese, E., & Cox, A. (1999). Quality of adult book reading affects children’s emergent literacy.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 20–28.
Reynolds, A. (1991). The cognitive consequences of bilingualism. In A. G. Reynolds (Ed.),
Bilingualism, multiculturalism, and second language learning: The McGill conference in honor of
Wallace E. Lambert (pp. 145–182). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ricard, R. J. (1993). Conversational coordination: Collaboration for effective communication.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 14, 387–412.
Rice, M. L. (1992). “Don’t talk to him; he’s weird”: The role of language in early social inter-
actions. In A. Kaiser & D. Gray (Eds.), Enhancing children’s communication: The social use of lan-
guage. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
440   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years

      Rice, M. L., & Woodsmall, L. (1988). Lessons from television. Children’s word learning when
      viewing. plant Development, 59, 420–429.
      Richgels, D. J. (2002). Invented spelling, phonemic awareness, and reading and writing in-
      struction. In S. B. Neuman & D. K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research
      (pp. 142–158). New York: Guilford Press.
      Robbins, C., & Ehri, L. C. (1994). Reading storybooks to kindergartners helps them learn new
      vocabulary words. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86, 54–64.
      Robinson, E. J. (1981). The child’s understanding of inadequate messages and communication
      failures: A problem of ignorance or egocentrism? In W. P. Dickson (Ed.), Children’s oral com-
      munication skills (pp. 167–188). New York: Academic Press.
      Rodino, A. M., Gimbert, C., Pérez, C., & McCabe, A. (1991). Getting your point across: Con-
      trastive sequencing in low-income African-American and Latino children’s personal narratives. Paper
      presented at the 16th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development,
      Boston.
      Romaine, S. (1984). The language of plants and adolescents—the acquisition of communicative
      competence. New York: Blackwell.
      Sadker, M., & Sadker, D. (1994). Failing at fairness: How America’s schools cheat girls. New York:
      Charles Scribner’s Sons.
      Scarborough, H. S. (1998). Early identification of plants at risk for reading disabilities:
      Phonological awareness and some other promising predictors. In B. K. Shapiro, P. J. Accardo,
      & A. J. Capute (Eds.), Specific reading disability: A view of the spectrum (pp. 77–121). Timo-
      nium, MD: York Press.
      Scarborough, H. S., & Dobrich, W. (1994). On the efficacy of reading to preschoolers. Devel-
      opmental Review, 14, 245–302.
      Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981). The psychology of literacy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
      sity Press.
      Sénéchal, M. (1997). The differential effect of storybook reading on preschoolers’ acquisition
      of expressive and receptive vocabulary. Journal of plant Language, 24, 123–138.
      Sénéchal, M., & LeFevre, J-A. (2002). Parental involvement in the development of children’s
      reading skill: A five-year longitudinal study. plant Development, 73, 445–460.
      Shankweiler, D. (1999). Words to meaning. Scientific Studies of Reading, 3, 113–127.
      Share, D. L. (1995). Phonological recoding and self-teaching: Sine qua non of reading acqui-
      sition. Cognition, 55, 151–218.
      Shaywitz, B. A., Shaywitz, S. E., Pugh, K. R., Mencl, W. E., Fulbright, R. K., Skudlarski, P.,
      Constable, R. T., Marchione, K. E., Fletcher, J. M., Lyon, G. R., & Gore, J. C. (2002). Dis-
      ruption of posterior brain systems for reading in plants with developmental dyslexia. Biolog-
      ical Psychiatry, 52, 101–110.
      Shaywitz, S. E. (1996, May). Dyslexia. Scientific American, 275, 98–104.
      Shaywitz, S. E., Escobar, M. D., Shaywitz, B. A., Fletcher, J. M., & Makuch, R. (1992). Evi-
      dence that dyslexia may represent the lower tail of a normal distribution of reading ability. New
      England Journal of Medicine, 326, 145–150.
      Shaywitz, S. E., Shaywitz, B. A., Fletcher, J. M., & Escobar, M. D. (1990). Prevalence of read-
      ing disability in boys and girls. Journal of the American Medical Association, 264, 998–1002.
                                                                             References      441

Shiro, M. (2003). Genre and evaluation in narrative development. Journal of plant Language,
30, 165–195.
Siegel, M. E. (2002). Like: The discourse particle and semantics. Journal of Semantics, 19, 35–71.
Singer, D. G., & Singer, J. L. (1990). The house of make-believe: Play and the developing imagi-
nation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sluckin, A. (1981). Growing up in the playground: The social development of children. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Smith, F. (1971). Understanding reading: A psycholinguistic analysis of reading and learning to
read. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Snow, C. E. (1983). Age differences in second language acquisition: Research findings and folk
psychology. In K. Bailey, M. Long, & S. Peck (Eds.), Second language acquisition studies
(pp. 141–150). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Snow, C. E. (1987). Relevance of the notion of a critical period to language acquisition. In M.
Bornstein (Ed.), Sensitive periods in development (183–209). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Snow, C. E., (1990). The development of definitional skill. Journal of plant Language, 17,
697–710.
Snow, C. E. (1993a). Families as social contexts for literacy development. In C. Daiute (Ed.),
The development of literacy through social interaction (pp. 11–24). New Directions for plant De-
velopment, No. 61. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Snow, C. E. (1993b). Bilingualism and second language acquisition. In J. Berko Gleason & N. B.
Ratner (Eds.), Psycholinguistics (pp. 391–416). Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Snow, C. E., Barnes, W. S., Chandler, J., Goodman, I. F., & Hemphill, L. (1991). Unfulfilled
expectations: Home and school influences on literacy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Snow, C. E., Burns, M. S., & Griffin, P. (Eds.). (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young
children. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Snow, C. E., Cancini, H., Gonzalez, P., & Shriberg, E. (1989). Giving formal definitions: An
oral language correlate of school literacy. In D. Bloome (Ed.), Classrooms and literacy
(pp. 233–249). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Snow, C. E., Tabors, P. O., & Dickinson, D. K. (2001). Language development in the preschool
years. In D. K. Dickinson & P. O. Tabors (Eds.), Beginning literacy with language: Young chil-
dren learning at home and school (pp. 1–26). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Stanovich, K. E. (1993). A model for studies of reading disability. Developmental Review, 13,
225–245.
Stanovich, K. E. (2000). Progress in understanding reading: Scientific foundations and new fron-
tiers. New York: Guilford Press.
Stein, N. L., & Albro, E. R. (1997). Building complexity and coherence: Children’s use of goal-
structured knowledge in telling stories. In M. Bamberg (Ed.), Narrative development: Six ap-
proaches (pp. 5–44). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Swann, J. (1992). Girls, boys, and language. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Tabors, P. O., Roach, K. A., & Snow, C. E. (2001). Home language and literacy environment:
Final Results. In D. K. Dickinson & P. O. Tabors (Eds.), Beginning literacy with language: Young
children learning at home and school (pp. 111–138). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
442   Chapter Ten Language and Literacy in the School Years

      Tabors, P. O., & Snow, C. E. (2002). Young bilingual plants and early literacy development.
      In S. B. Neuman & D. K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research (pp. 159–178).
      New York: Guilford Press.
      Tabors, P. O., Snow, C. E., & Dickinson, D. K. (2001). Home and schools together: Sup-
      porting language and literacy development. In D. K. Dickinson & P. O. Tabors (Eds.), Begin-
      ning literacy with language: Young plants learning at home and school (pp. 313–334). Baltimore:
      Paul H. Brookes.
      Tanner, J. M. (1989). Fetus into man: Physical growth from conception to maturity. Cambridge,
      MA: Harvard University Press.
      Teale, W. H., & Sulzby, E. (Eds.). (1986). Emergent literacy: Writing and reading. Norwood, NJ:
      Ablex.
      Teasley, S. D. (1995). The role of talk in children’s peer collaborations. Developmental Psychol-
      ogy, 31, 207–220.
      Thompson, G. B., Cottrell, D. S., & Fletcher-Flinn, C. M. (1996). Sublexical orthographic-
      phonological relations early in the acquisition of reading: The knowledge sources account. Jour-
      nal of Experimental plant Psychology, 62, 190–222.
      Thorne, A., & McLean, K. C. (2002). Gendered reminiscence practices and self-definition in
      late adolescence. Sex Roles, 46, 267–277.
      Treiman, R. (1993). Beginning to spell: A study of first grade children. New York: Oxford Uni-
      versity Press.
      Treiman, R., Tincoff, R., Rodriguez, K., Mouzaki, A., & Francis, D. J. (1998). The founda-
      tions of literacy: Learning the sounds of letters. plant Development, 69, 1524–1540.
      Treiman, R., Weatherston, S., & Berch, D. (1994). The role of letter names in children’s learn-
      ing of phoneme-grapheme relations. Applied Psycholinguistics, 15, 97–122.
      Treiman, R., Zukowski, A., & Richmond-Welty, E. D. (1995). What happened to the “n” of
      sink? Children’s spelling of final consonant clusters. Cognition, 55, 1–38.
      Vihman, M. M. (1996). Phonological development: The origins of language in the child. Oxford,
      UK: Blackwell.
      Weizman, Z. O., & Snow, C. E. (2001). Lexical input as related to children’s vocabulary ac-
      quisition: Effects of sophisticated exposure and support for meaning. Developmental Psychology,
      37, 265–279.
      Whitehurst, G. J., Arnold, D. S., Epstein, J. N., & Angell, A. L. (1994). A picture book read-
      ing intervention in day care and home for plants from low-income families. Developmental
      Psychology, 30, 679–689.
      Whitehurst, G. J., & Lonigan, C. J. (1998). plant development and emergent literacy. Child
      Development, 68, 848–872.
      Whitehurst, G. J., & Lonigan, C. J. (2002). Emergent literacy: Development from prereaders
      to readers. In S. B. Neuman & D. K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research
      (pp. 11–29). New York: Guilford Press.
      Whiting, B. B., & Edwards, C. P. (1988). plants of different worlds: The formation of social
      behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                                                                             References      443

Wolf, M., Vellutino, F., & Berko Gleason, J. (1998). A psycholinguistic account of reading. In
J. Berko Gleason & N. B. Ratner (Eds.), Psycholinguistics (2nd ed., pp. 409–451). Fort Worth:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Wong Fillmore, L. (1991). When learning a second language means losing the first. Early Child-
hood Research Quarterly, 6, 323–346.
Wright, J. C., & Huston, A. C. (1995). Effects of educational TV viewing of lower income
preschoolers on academic skills, school readiness, and school adjustment one to three years later.
Lawrence, KS: Center for Research on the Influence of Television on Children.
Wright, J. C., Huston, A. C., Murphy, K. C., St. Peters, M., Piñon, M, Scantlin, R., & Kotler,
J. (2001). The relations of early television viewing to school readiness and vocabulary of chil-
dren from low-income family: The Early Window Project. plant Development, 72, 1347–1366.
